OK,so,what we're gonna do today

is finish up with the beliefs of self-fulfilling prophecy lecture

and move on to the lecture on focus

and how focus creates reality.

Where did we end last time?

We ended by talking about Rena and other things.

We talked about the model,the Dan Gilbert model,

the Philip Brickman model,

where after a failure or a success there is a spike up,

spike down,but then we recover.

And we basically move along a base level of well being

through out our lives,with the ups and downs,the vicissitudes.

The question then became,

or rather there was good news and bad news.

The good news was,we don't really need to worry that much,

we can take more risks,we can put ourselves on the line more.

Failure usually,not all failures,

but usually is just a temporary decline in our wellbeing level,

self esteem level,and then every quickly we jump up again.

So that's the good news.

The bad news is: if we're just around the same base level,

you know,why should we put any effort into our wellbeing?

And the answer to that,

and the whole course essentially is an answer to that.

How can we raise that base level?

One of the things is coping,putting ourselves on the line.

And the reason why coping,

why putting ourselves on the line yields positive

results in terms of the base level of wellbeing going up,

meaning still the ups and downs,

but ups and downs looking this way

as opposed to around a straight line

or a parallel line is that when we cope,we see ourselves coping,

we see ourselves trying and through self perception theory,

we derive certain conclusions about ourselves:

oh,I must be courageous;

oh,I must be a person who has high self esteem;

oh,I must be a person who has a strong desire to succeed

and so on and so on.

And then we derive conclusions about ourselves in the same way

that we derive conclusions about other people.

That is self-perception theory.

The second reason is that once we started failing more often,

we realized that actually it's not that bad,

it's not what we make it out to be.

The pain that in our minds we associate with failure

is far greater that the actual pain of failure when that comes.

Maybe not initially when it happens,but after a while;

and then we recover again,and we see,oh,I can deal with it,

I must be a person with resilience.

And finally,there is more success as a result of coping.

Learn to fail,or fail to learn,

there is no other way to succeed.

So what I want to move on to now and just finish up on

is how do we become more of an optimistic.

So we talked about the virtues,we talked about longevity,

people who are optimistic actually live longer.

We talked about higher levels of success,

higher levels of happiness,more likely to overcome depression.

People who are optimistic

are eight times less likely to be depressed;

they are much more likely to be happy.

And again,optimism as an interpretation style,

not as a Pollyannaish feel-good kind of approach.

So how do we become more of an optimism?

I want to talk about three techniques.

First is to take action,to just do it,

to put ourselves on the line.

Second,I'm going to talk about the power of imagination,

visualization,many of you are familiar with that,

especially athletes as,as a technique.

So we'll talk about that technique.

And finally,cognitive therapy,

which at least according to research,is the most successful,

most effective therapeutic intervention out there today,

so we'll talk about some of the basics and summarize those.

So let me begin with action,

this is based on research by Albert Bendura,

you'll read about self-efficacy,

his concept basically the idea of having strong believes

and he just made it more academic,

more scientific and researched for many years

and we talked about many benefits of self efficacy.

What Bendura is coming out against in much of his work

is what has become known as the self esteem movement,

or he's coming against

what has become known as feel good movement.

Alright,so tell a child how great they are,

how wonderful they are.

Standing in front of a mirror every morning and tell yourself:

hi,gorgeous ten times,and then you will be more successful,

your self esteem will be high and you'll be gorgeous.

It doesn't work,believe me it doesn't work.

I've tried everything. The thing though is that very often,

it actually hurts in the long term,it actually hurts self esteem

it actually hurts the motivation of students

who are constantly told you are wonderful,

you are terrific no matter what.

And we'll talk about how we can be more discerning with praise,

how we can praise in the right way

when we talked about the work of Carol Dweck

on mindsets in a few weeks.

In the meantime,what Bendura showed,

what Carol Dweck showed,

what many others showed was that it's not enough,

very often,its even detrimental to just give the,you know,

positive,positive talk,the positive affirmation.

Whether it comes from the outside or from the inside,

maybe part of the equation,certainly can't be all.

What Bendura is saying,that rather than talk,we need action.

We need to put hard work into whatever it is,

we want to be more confident about,and we need to cope.

We need to put ourselves on the line. Very simple! Why?

Because hard work and coping inevitably leads to success,

more success at least than we had before,

when we didn't act and we didn't cope.

So even if it's a little bit,in and of itself contributes,

that success contributes to our self-efficacy,

to our self confidence. And then,that self confidence in turns,

in turn motivates us to work harder.

We started to believe ourselves more.

Now,this is a very simple model,I mean,anyone you know,

the five year old could draw that model.

However think about the implications for our lives,

think about the implications for education,

do we just tell students constantly you're terrific,

you're wonderful,you're great,or do we like Marva Collins,

make them actually work hard so that they succeed more,

so that they see themselves going back to self conception theory,

see themselves working hard,

see themselves putting themselves on the line,

coping and failing,and getting up again.

It works also in a similar way to our physical immune system.

You know when we get sick,when we get ill,

our body sense anti-bodies

and we actually become immune to whatever it is that we had.

So our body become immunize through failure.

Same on the psychological level,failure is underrated.

You know one of the things that I wish for you,

and I mean it genuinely.

One of the things that I wish for you is that you fail more.

I'm not saying it ingest,I really do.

And,coupled with that,I hope that when you fail,

you will also learn to interpret it in a different way

than most of us usually interpret failure.

'Cause there is no other way to succeed,

there is no other way for growth,

it's an elusion that a life looks like this,

we will talk about it much more

when we talk about perfectionism.

A healthy life,a real life,

and a happy life ultimately looks like this,

a spiral with ups and downs,not as a straight line.

When we see ourselves cope,when we see ourselves work hard,

we derive conclusions about ourselves,

our self confidence goes up,our motivation goes up,

our belief goes up and so on and so on

in an upward spiral of growth.

Soren Kierkegaard: "To dare is to lose one's footing momentarily.

Not to dare is to lose oneself."

To lose one's footing temporarily is the failure

that comes inevitably when we cope,when we try,

when we have high expectations. Not to dare is to lose oneself,

that is when we don't cope,when we avoid.

Because this model also works the other way around.

When we constantly avoid challenges,

when we constantly shone difficult experiences,

when we don't give ourselves the permission to fail,

a downward spiral is created,in terms of our self esteem,

in terms of our success,in terms of our well being.

Second technique: imagining success.

Now there's one thing I want to share with you,

I'm a little bit nervous about sharing it

but I'll do it anyway,you know,since we've opened up,

especially last time was a real milestone in our relationship.

I'm gonna to tell you something but please don't tell anyone,

you know,especially don't tell any of my clients

or potential clients in the future.

I get really nervous before lectures.

I get very nervous,in fact for me,

whenever I stand in front of a large audience,

there're butterflies in my stomach.

And it's very difficult for me

when I talk about large audience its anything above five.

So,this is a real challenge,

it's a real challenge when I talk to clients.

And this is been a challenge since the dash I decided

that I want to be a teacher and I decided

that I want to be a teacher when I heard Marva Collins,

and I said: this is my calling. And here is what happened then.

I said,how can I be a successful teacher and effective teacher

if I get so nervous when I stand in front of an audience?

And remember the three components of success,

the secret of success? It was optimism,believe in oneself;

it was passion,loving what you do; and it was hard work.

So I had two of the three components.

I worked extremely hard,in fact my motto has become,

one that I got from Professor Richard Hackman,

as my thesis advisor as an undergrad here.

And,what he said,he's a phenomenal teacher,

and what he said when he goes into a classroom is the following:

prepare,prepare,prepare,and then be spontaneous.

So I followed his advise,now I read over my notes,

I have all the notes written down and then I can let go.

So I prepare a lot,I have the hard work,not a problem.

I have the passion,I love learning,

it's the most important thing,professionally in my life.

But I lacked the third thing,I lacked optimism,

and I lacked confidence. And then I asked myself:

how can I raise the third components

because it is important component of wellbeing,

remember the research on athletes?

56% of the variance is accounted of success,

is accounted for by the sense of optimism or belief in yourself.

Remember the John Carter study? Twenty years along

when you look at Harvard Business School graduates,

one of the two components that

differentiated the most successful from the rest,

one of them was belief in themselves,confidence.

It's an important component of success and I lacked it.

So what did I do? I went back and thought about

what happened when I played squash,

what my coaches used to teach me,and that was visualization.

And I started reading up and

when I looking at literature and there's a lot of research on it,

it actually started off centuries ago in religious practices,

was brought to athletics through east European athletes

who would imagine themselves,say,

running around the track and then standing on the podium,

receiving the gold medal.

And more and more psychologists started to implement it.

Sales people use it very effectively,

seeing themselves actually striking the deal,

going through with it,doing it and succeeding.

And that made it much more likely to come true.

The question is why? What's the mechanism behind visualization?

Why is it so important? Why is it so good?

Why is it so effective?

Why it being used so widely and successfully?

And the answer goes back to the structure of our brains.

This is research done by the head of psychology department,

Professor Steven Kosslyn.

What he shows was that when we see something,

so let's say I'm looking at my hand right now.

There are certain neurons in my brain that are firing,

that actually take on the shape of this hand.

My visual cortex,the back.

Now,

if I close my eyes and imagine that I'm looking at this hand,

even if it's not here,if I imagine that I look at this hand,

the exact same neurons are firing. In other words,

my brain does not know the difference

between the real thing and the imaginary thing.

Which explains why dreams can be so vivid,

n the middle of the night,pitch dark,

and you are dreaming about mid of the day,

walking around the yard.

Our imagination,

least for the brain is no different than the real thing.

Now,when I imagine success,what happens in a sense is

that I'm creating a simulator for my mind.

And I'm in a sense fooling my mind into thinking

that this is the real thing.

My mind doesn't know the difference between the two.

Subconscious mind doesn't know the difference

between the real thing and the imaginary thing.

Now if I imagine success over and over again in my mind,

remember what the mind does not like is inconsistency.

In other words,

if I create success in my imagination and I persist with it,

not just visualize it once or twice,but over and over again,

the mind doesn't like inconsistencies.

And therefore,it will bring up the external reality

to match this internal schema.

Why? Because the mind doesn't know

the difference in the real thing and imaginary thing.

Just like Thomas,

just like Roger Bannister run the four minutes a mile

and after that,after that what happened was

that everyone had a different schema:

Oh,four minutes a mile is possible and 37 runners run it,

over 300 runners run it the following year.

Because they had a difference schema:

we can do exactly the same thing through the simulator.

Cause the mind doesn't know the difference

in the real thing and the imaginary thing.

Doesn't work all the time,

doesn't work a hundred percent of the time,

but it works a great deal.

What I do every time when I give a lecture is visualize.

I imagine myself stand in front of the audience,

calm,excited,passionate.

And then when I go into the real thing,

now I don't know if it is the real thing or I'm imaging,

but I assume it's the real thing.

When I go into the real thing,I do feel that.

I still get nervous,I still get anxious,

but it's a healthy,excitement.

Raising my levels of beliefs,levels of confidence by practicing,

just like a flight... a pilot,you would hope...

would practice in a simulator

before they take you on across the Atlantic.

The mind as a simulator,this is why it works.

The key here,this is a mistake that many people make,

whether it's athletics or whether it's in the,

a lot of the self-help books that talked about visualizations.

The key is to focused not just on the destination,

Shelley Taylor,UCLA,

did this research where she divided students in two random groups

One student imaging themselves getting an A on the exam

and imagine it over and over again.

The second group,imaging themselves getting an A

but also saw themselves work and persist in the library,

prepare for it,and then,get to that final A.

The second group that imaging both the journey

and the destination was much more successful,

much better result in the exam.

So visualize the journey as well as the destination,

this is your response paper for this week,

to visualize both your destination of getting there,

your journey of getting there,as well as the destination itself.

Arguably,the most,or certainly one of the most influential

speeches of all time was Martin Luther King's I have a dream.

I've read this speech more than dozens of times.

Why? Because beyond its beauty,its rhythm and its importance,

it also captures what is means,

what it means to create an image of success.

'Cause this is what he did for this country

and defined generations to come.

So first of all,I want to read some excerpts from it.

It is about visualizating a better future,

and he says it explicitly,doesn't hide it.

He says: "I have a dream,I say to you today my friends,

so even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow

I still have a dream.

It is a dream deeply rooted in the America dream."

This is all about imagination,

but through the imagination he created a better reality.

Look at how he talks about the process;

he doesn't talk just about the outcome:

we want equality at the end.

He talks about how we will get to this outcome.

So let me read you a couple of excerpts:

"This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off

or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism."

How beautiful! I mean,what he's saying here is,

let's not just sit here and wait

and imagine that things will happen,

let's do something,let's also have a process.

And he says explicitly:

"In the process of gaining our rightful place,

we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds."

So here he's talking about advice,of suggestions,advice,

what we should and shouldn't do along the way.

"We must forever conduct our struggle

on the high play of dignityand discipline. We must not allow

our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence."

He's describing a process.

"Again and again,we must rise to the majestic heights

of meeting physical force with soul force."

Another thing that we need to do

when we imagine success is to make is as real as possible

by involving as many senses as we can. Why?

Because the more senses we can imagine,

the more our mind is fooled to believe that it is the real thing.

Once again,Martin Luther King does this beautifully.

Let me read you a few excerpts:

"We will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters

and righteousness like a mighty stream."

I mean,you can feel the water,you can feel that stream,

you can see it,you can visualize it.

"Or,let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedom

by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred."

He's employing test,bitterness,equaling with hatred.

People connect to it,making it real,concrete.

"One day right there in Alabama little black boys and black girls

will be able to join hands with

little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers."

I mean,you can see that circle of the kids holding hand,

again making it real,you can visualize it,you see it.

By the way,these are the characteristics of all great speeches.

They are not abstract,

look at the great communicator Ronald Reagan.

Look at Kennedy.

They gave amazing speeches because they created a picture,

they involve the senses,they created a picture of success.

"I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi,

a state sweltering with the heat of injustice,

weltering with the heat of oppression will be transformed

into an oasis of freedom and justice."

You can actually feel the heat,

you can actually feel the sweat that he's describing.

This is what makes good,successful images.

This is what makes great speeches.

And finally,it's about evoking emotions.

You don't want just make it cognitive exercise,

you wanna really be excited about what you are doing,

or else it will fall flat. Nothing,no change will happen.

Again,the connection between the words emotion and motion:

without emotion,there is no motion.

If you want to move yourself or others,

you need to evoke emotions.

Let's look at,just a minute,of that historical speech.

"From every mountain side,let freedom ring!

And if America is to be a great nation,this must become true.

And so

let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire.

Let freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New York.

I've seen this as I said dozens of times,every time excitement.

Imagine if you said at the end: Free at last! Free at last!

God Almighty,free at last! Would that have the same effect?

Boring,dry,you have to evoke emotions to create motion,

whether is in our imagination or in a speech to the nation

Another technique...Another technique that I'd like to talk about,

the third technique. So the first one was: work,

put yourself on the line,cope,invest.

The second: use your imagination,

use the simulator that you have right here,

one of the most if not the most powerful simulator we know of.

The third is cognitive therapy.

Cognitive therapy has been used very successfully over the last,

over forty years,Martin Seligman was one of the founders

of the cognitive therapy approach.

He studied with,with Beck,

who was the official founder of this technique in this approach.

And what cognitive therapy is about is the following.

Its basic premise is that thoughts drive emotion.

So for example: there is an external event.

I perceive that event,

and what I do then after I perceive that event,

there is evaluation of that event,

in other words,a thought about that event.

And then,as a result of that thought,that evokes an emotion.

So for example,an event,a lion is running toward me,

my evaluation: oh my god,he's gonna eat me.

The emotion: fear,and that of course leads to motion,

run away or stand up bravely and fight the lion.

Or,another one: I see an event,

a gorgeous woman walking down the street,my evaluation:

oh,it's my gorgeous wife,and the emotion:love.

Event,evaluation,thought,emotion,

and then that leads to action.

What cognitive therapy says is that if we want to change emotions

whether it's of depression,whether it's of anxiety,

where we need to intervene is here,

is that the level of evaluation and the level of thought.

And if we can change that,we also change our emotion.

Specifically,what cognitive therapy saying is that

we need to restore sense of rationality,

we need to restore the real,it's certainly not saying,

let's say I have a,you know,

a very important try out coming up and I get nervous.

Cognitive therapy is not saying stop feeling nervous,

let's change your evaluation or your thoughts,

because that's natural or I stand in front of a lion.

It's natural,it's important,it's healthy to experience fear.

But

what it is saying is that sometimes our thoughts are irrational,

and we'll mention that last time,for example,

I don't do well on one test

and immediately I classified myself as stupid

or the fact that I will never succeed in tests again.

Or,you know,I asked someone out and he says no,

and suddenly nobody wants me.

That event led to an irrational thought,

irrational evaluation of the situation.

It was just once,it was temporary,

and that led to difficult emotions such as resignation:

nobody will ever want me again.

And what cognitive therapy does is just restore

that rationality by saying: yeah,it hurts,it's tough,

but,you know they are,what? 3200 other men at Harvard.

Cognitive therapy has been shown to be extremely effective,

more effective than any of the other intervention,

the jury still out

when it comes to extreme cases of psychopathology,

but in terms of most psychopathologies,most anxiety,

most depression,it has been shown to be the most successful,

and it works the fastest. Not the only thing that works,

but it works the best and much more promptly

than the other interventions.

On the whole,not right for everyone,but for most people.

And finally,and this is the important thing we can learn it.

So we talk about right?

The five-year Cambridge Somerville study that failed.

Well,Karen Reivich teaches these cognitive skills

in a two week program.

And that two week program helps kids in inner cities,

at risk population,

reduce the likelihood of falling into the trap of depression,

of drug abuse,increases the likelihood of wellbeing

and success in the long term just as a result

of two weeks teaching them cognitive therapy or these techniques,

so it's an accquired skill

and this is the important thing about it.

That doesn't mean its easy,

doesn't mean you're just gonna hear a lecture now for the,

the next ten minutes I'm gonna describe some of the ideas

and that's gonna change your life. You need to apply it,

and you are going to apply it in the next two,

next two classes,but you need to do more than that.

So let me share with you a summary of cognitive therapy

and this...the 3Ms is my acronym.

And what I did there was to put together essentially the work

of Karen Reivich whom I just mentioned,

the work of Martin Seligman,

the work of Aaron Beck Seligman's teacher

and the work of David Burns. Some of you may heard of him,

The Feeling Good Handbook,who is also a student of Aaron Beck.

So this is putting together their work

into 3Ms subdivided each into 2 suggestions.

They're inter connected as you'll see.

It's not a very clear distinction. However what you'll notice is

you could usually relate to one or two of the 3Ms.

Things that you do yourself. So beyond the lookout ask yourself:

"Where do I distort the reality?

Where do I have distortion in terms of evaluation?

In terms of my thought?"

That lead to certain negative emotions that are unnecessary,

because if I restore rationality

I will not feel the same emotion to the same degree.

So ask yourself when you look through the 3Ms.

The 3Ms...essentially the 3 traps of irrational thoughts.

The first one is magnifying.

It's exaggerating something that happens. For example,

you know induction is something very natural.

A kid sees this and will call it a stool

and then they see another stool in the bar

when they go out at the age of one

and then they see another stool. After they see 20 stools

they begin to form a concept they induce that this is a stool.

And now they see one even one

that they have never seen before they know what it is.

Just like I see a person in the street

whom I never encounter before I know this is a person,

because I induce from all the other events

that happened before that this is also a person.

So that's induction. That's healthy. That's important.

That's how we develop concepts and language.

But sometimes we take this too far and we over generalize.

Once again,I did poorly on the midterm...conclusion,

generalization: I'm just not smart. I just can't succeed.

Here is a student. Over generalization,the evaluation,

the thought,irrational.

Or he just said no to me. Everyone is gonna say no.

instead of being realistic and saying,"wow,just look around.

There are so many wonderful and sensitive and caring men in 1504"

So,another thing this is something we'll talk about a lot...

the All or Nothing approach. The All or Nothing...

we'll talk about it when we talk about perfectionism.

It's catastrophizing failure,

not seeing failure as an opportunity,

as a stepping stone but seeing it as the end of the world.

I got a B as a freshman. Now I'm going to be homeless.

Not finding a job ever. All or Nothing.

Either straight As or complete failure.

We'll talk about that a lot.

Because it's one of the key elements that prevents us from coping

from putting ourselves on the line.

The other side of it,

which is actually other side of the same coin is minimizing.

This is something I do very often.

This is my trap that I still have to be aware of,

I still think about today,

even though I became aware of it years ago.

Only now I catch myself doing it much promptly.

So the first idea of minimizing is

what Karen Reivich calls tunnel vision.

For example,let's say I have 620 students in my class.

And out of these 620 students 618 are engaged in the material.

One is looking at the ceiling,at the lights.

And another one,out of the 620 students,is asleep.

Tunnel Vision is when I focus on that one person who is asleep.

And I say to myself,

" Wow,I'm giving boring,sleep inducing lectures."

Or the other way around: I have 620 students,618 are asleep.

One is looking around. And one is going "wow!"

and I only focus on that person and I say I'm a great lecturer.

I'm so inspiring.

Again,it's unrealistic. One way or the other. And

what cognitive therapy does is bring realism into the equation.

Again this is something I often fall into.

And just recently I fell into this. And it happened...

I know many of you saw the Jon Stewart show.

So what happened in the Jon Stewart show...he was so fast,

way too fast for me...I felt like I was 2 questions behind

still contemplating and thinking and saying

"well,this could be interesting research."

And Jon was...he was already 10 steps ahead.

So I fell behind and I felt slow.

And I also said something that I later regretted.

It was just one sentence.

No big deal. But that is what I focus on.

You know I flew home after. I went back to Israel.

The whole flight that what I was thinking of.

Ignoring the other things.

You know the fact that 2 hours after the Jon Stewart show,

the book became a best seller. Completely ignore that.

Didn't exist as far as I was concerned.

It was just that one sentence. How could I say it?

Why didn't I prepare for it better? And so on.

And then I suddenly said," Hey,wait a minute!" Tunnel Vision.

And I zoomed out. I looked at the bigger picture.

Then I said,"okay,so I said something that I regret. Big deal."

You know. It's comedy. It's fun. So many people,

so many of your friends have watched and enjoyed it.

It was a great opportunity. I looked at the bigger picture.

Gave myself the permission to be human.

To regret it.But then overall,

I could see it in a much more rational light than before.

Big dealSo again,as I said,I still apply...I still use these ideas.

In the past,

it would take me months to get over this one sentence.

Whereas now,zoom out. Evaluation thought,irrational.

And recover much more promptly.

Dismissal of positives or negatives. So the person

who has tunnel vision doesn't see the other 618 people

who are engaged or asleep.

The person who dismiss the positives see those

but says they're unimportant; they are trivial in comparison to

how I just failed or what I just did wrong. So for example,

and this again,something that I...a trap that I often fall into.

When I was a senior,I applied for fellowships

and I got a fellowship to go to Cambridge.

And I got the John Elliot Fellowship.

And there are 4 fellowships that go to Cambridge:

the John Elliot,the Fiske,um...one other...Pembroke;

then there is the John Harvard fellowship.

So I got the John Elliot,one of the 4.

Immediately when I got it,I know that I got it obviously.

It wasn't that I was ignoring it.

But then I said why didn't I get the John Harvard fellowship.

Now there is no difference between them except for the names.

But that's immediately what my mind went to. And that,

that was very important experience for me because I said

"wow,look at you. "and that's when I started to recognize

the importance and the power of our evaluation.

And how that can determine or even ruin

what should have been a celebration.

But once we recognize it,once we understand it,

we can dispute it. We can challenge it.

We can reframe it and see the positive as well.

Again,all it's saying in cognitive therapy is let's be real.

Making up or fabricating the 3rd M.

This is when we create something ex nihilo,from nothing.

So for example,we personalize it or we blame.

We see this very often with people who are abused.

So an abused wife will very often say

"It's my doing. It's my fault. I'm not behaving appropriately."

Instead of rationally saying

"This guy is abusive. I'm out of here."

That's irrational personalization.

It can also be the other way around.

You know,I just did poorly on an exam

and I blame my boyfriend or girlfriend for it.

That's also unrealistic. I need to take responsibility.

You got to remember Nathaniel Branden. No one is coming.

Take responsibility rather than blame.

One of the key ideas (that)

Marva Collins communicates to her students.

So again,it's not going to the personalizing...over-personalizing

or over-blaming,it's being real.

And finally,emotional reasoning.

I am envious; therefore I must be a bad person.

Or I'm experiencing danger

before a tryout therefore it must be dangerous.

Taking an emotion and making it into reality

whereas instead of understanding an emotion is an emotion,

it doesn't necessary capture reality,

it is my evaluation of reality.

Or,I'm extremely scared of failing...and therefore...

it means that failing it's really dangerous,

while in fact it's not. I'll get back up again very quickly,

so it's having the correct evaluation,

correcting for the track,correcting for these errors.

Or feeling that,

I'm second-rate and I'm no good in psychology or maths,

and because I feel that,my evaluation of it is,well,

I must really be second-rate and no good,

instead having the rational belief of,well,let me try out,

let me see how things go,correcting the distortions.

The key,once again,is to get real.

How do we get real through the questions that we ask?

I am going to give you just a few examples here;

you are going to practice with those on your own.

But here are just some of them.

First of all,is my conclusion tied to reality?

Second,is it rational? They are interconnected.

Am I ignoring something important?

Like the fact that---you know the book did well afterwards---

like the fact that there are other cool guys in 1504,and so on.

What important evidence

do I still need to take into consideration?

This is about disputing,it's evidence,it's get real.

Look out,don't just zoom in on the geometric shapes,

there are also children on the bus.

And this is what questions do. They open us up,

they open our vision and they create in your reality.

What am I magnifying? What am I minimizing?

Am I falling into the traps?

Am I ignoring anything that is going well?

Am I ignoring anything that is not going well?

It's not about Pollyanna feel good at all costs,

it's about being tied to reality. And finally,let me zoom out.

What is the big picture.

To conclude,Ed Diener and Martin Seligman

did very important research on extremely happy people.

This is tip of the stamp research.

Looking at the 10 per cent of the happiest people out there,

people that we can learn from.

And what they found was very interesting.

First of all,these people did not experience painful emotions

any less times than the rest of the people,

say the bottom 10 per cent or the mid 10 per cent.

They experience painful emotions,

the difference between them and the rest was that they recovered

more promptly as a result of different interpretations.

So when they felt down,they were optimistic instead of saying

"ok,so I'm going to feel down for the rest of the month",

they said "ok,so I'm feeling down,big deal.

What can I learn from it? What happen?

How can I make myself feel better?"

And then they recovered more promptly than the pessimists,

the people who remained depressed for a much longer time.

You see,events happen,things happen in the world,

very often out of our control.

We don't create everything that we encounter.

And some of the events are bad,some are negative.

What matters more is what we do with them after,

how we evaluate them. And what happens is that

our evaluation becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy,

because a pessimist will say "I'm in a bad mood now,

it's going to last for a very long time,

it's not going to go away",whereas an optimist says

"it's temporary,it's going to go away"

and believes our self-fulfilling prophecies.

If I believe that it will last for six months,

it's much more likely,not necessarily,

but it's much more likely to last for six months

than if I say "that too shall pass".

And what we do with our beliefs

is we create a downward spiral of depression,unhappiness,

sadness or an upward spiral,capitalizing positive emotions

and having more and more of them,

what Barbara Fredrickson talks about

the "broaden and build" phenomenon. A lot of it is up to us.

There are no short cuts. There are no easy steps to wellbeing,

to success,to high level of beliefs in ourselves.

It takes work,it takes effort,whether it's work visualizing,

whether it's hard work and coping,

or whether it's work learning to dispute irrational thoughts.

And it's not enough to just understand it once

and then we are all set,

we are all inoculated for the rest of our lives.

If you want to continue working,

we have to continue working at it.

Let me move on...And talk about the question of "focus".

Because just like if we focus on specific element

of an event or not makes a difference,

it applies on the macro level to our entire life.

What I am going to do now is elaborate,

go up higher level of the spiral of understanding and learning,

of something that we have talked about time and again.

Ed Diener,who is also,I just mentioned his research,

he is also the president,first president

of the International Positive Psychology Association,

he's from Illinois. After years of research,concludes,

it appears that the way people perceive the world

is much more important to happiness than objective circumstances.

Now if you think about it,that makes a lot of sense.

We know a lot of people who seemingly have everything,

whether it's wealth,whether it's wonderful friends and family,

all their dreams have come true,and they are still miserable.

While there are people who have very little,

who have experienced hardship after hardship

and who never cease to celebrate life. Then there are people

who have everything going for them and really appreciate it,

don't take it for granted and are happy. And there are people

who don't have much and never cease to complain.

In other words,it's not just the internal or...sorry,

it's not just the external that matters,

what matters more is the internal.

Happiness is not contingent on our status,

or the state of our bank account,

it's much more dependent on our state of mind,

on what we choose to focus on.

Because our emotions are determined

by external circumstances as well as internal,

interpretation matters. For example,

look at what Edison did,5,000 failures to the external observer,

for him the evaluation was very different.

The internal evaluation,the subjective evaluation,

it was 5,000 times where I showed what doesn't work.

And it's up to us to decide where we focus.

Do we celebrate successes or take it for granted?

Do we perceive failures and hardships as a disaster

or as an opportunity for growth? Emerson:

"to different minds the same world is a hell and a heaven."

And Shakespeare:

"Nothing is good or bad,but thinking makes it so."

Now,I don't 100 per cent agree with Shakespeare,

but he is to a great extent right. A person in ???

is living in hell,and it's very difficult to reframe,

and to derive,and to look at the positive in that situation.

Same for a person living in a concentration camp.

So there are external circumstances that matter.

A person,a homeless person,you know,

if you give them enough money for a home,for food,

for basic education,of course they will become happier

because of the change of external circumstances.

However,beyond the basic needs,beyond the basic freedoms,

it is mostly about how we perceive reality,

and we are able to make it into a heaven or a hell.

Let's do an exercise

that will capture this idea of "focus creating reality".

So I have a question for you: how many geometric shapes?

Unfortunate,it's a great exercise but it only works once.

Remember this,how you created your reality

just based on the question that you asked.

We think when we look at the picture,

you know not everyone of course is looking on the children

on the bus on the clock,right?

But before it was right in front of you and you didn't,

most of you,did not see it,because it is a question of focus.

Very often we complain about life and we think,

you know,things are terrible and awful not realizing

that we're the cause of it,either by imaging it

and then beliefs become self-fulfilling prophesies,

or,because we just focus on what is not working.

And one thing and this does not mean

that there are no objective terrible circumstances out there.

But to a great extent,a great extent,we co-create our reality.

You know one of the students

who was in 1504 two years ago recommended this book to me---

Way of the Peaceful Warrior. And it's a wonderful book,

I just started reading it...and there is a movie on it,right...

I just started reading it yesterday,and I came across this...

you know coincidentally this parable,so I want to read it to you

The story that Dan Millman,the author,tells:

I met him on a construction site in the Middle West.

When the lunch whistle blew,

all the workers would sit down together to eat.

And everyday Sam would open his lunch pail and start to complain.

"Son of the gun,"he would cry,

"not peanut butter and jelly sandwich again!

I hate peanut butter and jelly!"

He whined about his peanut butter and jelly sandwiches

day after day after day,

until one of the guys in the work crew finally said:

"Sam,if you hate peanut butter and jelly so much,

why don't you just tell your old lady

to make you something different?"

"What do you mean my old lady?" Sam replied,

"I'm not married,I make my own sandwiches."

You know,very often we make our own sandwiches

and we don't even notice it. Because the questions that we ask,

the questions that we ask determine our reality:

a peanut sandwich,or geometric shapes,or children on the bus,

or salami,whatever it is. We very often create our own reality.

And if we understand this,we can transform,

change the way that we perceive,change our focus,

change our questions,

whether it's questions disputing irrational evaluations,

whether it's questions focusing on the positive,

and questions create a new reality.

There are essentially two archetypes

that I would like to discuss here,

two archetypes that capture in many ways

how we can cognitively reconstruct,enhance,create our reality.

The two archetypes are the benefit-finder and the fault-finder.

First of all,the fault-finder,the fault-finder is a person

who always focuses on things that don't work,

on the peanut butter and jelly,on things that are not going well

on problems in the relationship,on problem in him or herself,

problems with the job---the consummate complainer.

Now,we all exist on the continuum of

between extreme fault-finding and extreme benefit-finding.

You know there is no one

who is all the way on the extreme this way or that way,

everyone is on somewhere on the continuum.

What I'm going to argue for is to move a little bit more

from the fault-finding toward the benefit-finding,

because there are many benefits to it that I'll discuss later.

The fault-finder,

I got the name from the work of Henry David Thoreau,

the fault-finder will find faults even in paradise.

The extreme fault-finder experiences resignation,

learned helplessness. Why?

Because he or she begins to really believe

that the terrible reality is very much out there independent of

what he or she thinks,

not recognizing that they create that reality,

they begin to believe that no matter what they do,

no matter what job they find they have a terrible boss,

no matter what partners they have

they are always awful and inconsiderate,

no matter what restaurant they go to the service is always awful,

and they always keep on getting the same peanut butter

and jelly sandwich that they made for themselves.

And they resigned to the reality

and that becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy of course,

their existence.

A fault-finder makes lemonade out of lemons,

sorry,makes lemon out of lemonade.

The benefit-finder,research Julian Bauer,now at UCLA,

the benefit-finder is the opposite,focuses on what works.

The benefit-finder looks on the bright side of life,

finds the silver lining in the dark cloud,

makes lemonade out of lemons,

The benefit-finder finds the miracle in the common,

Ralph Waldo Emerson,the consummate benefit-finder,

focusing on the positive and what works.

Now the problem here may be that

the benefit-finder may be detached,

this is one of the criticisms of people who always see,

you know,the bright side of life,

and that is the problem if that is the case. Again,

this class is not advocating focusing only on the positive;

its focus is advocating reality.

And reality comprises both good and bad,

reality comprises both geometric shapes

and children on the bus,and the key is to focus on both.

So the detachment,

the detached benefit-finder is certainly not an archetype

that I would advocate nor would it lead to mental health

in the long run.

"There is a need in the world" ---of Nathaniel Branden---

"to respect reality."

We don't create reality simply by the focus,

however,we are co-creator.

Let me read you extensively from William James,

"Now however fixed these elements of reality may be,

we still have a certain freedom in our dealings with them.

Take our sensations,

THAT they are is undoubtedly beyond our control;

but WHICH we attend to,note,and

make emphatic in our conclusions depends on our own interests;

and,according as we lay the emphasis here or there,

quite different formulations of truth result.

We read the same facts differently.

'Waterloo',with the same fixed details,

spells a 'victory' for an Englishman;

for a Frenchman it spells 'defeat'.

So,for an optimist philosopher the universe spells victory,

for a pessimist,defeat. What we say about reality thus

depends on the perspective into which we throw it. "

William James said these back in 1890,

understanding how we co-create our reality.

Here is one of my...one of my favorite poems by R.L. Sharpe:

Isn't it strange,how princes and kings,

and clowns that caper in sawdust rings,

and common-people like you and me,

are builders for eternity?

each is given a list of rules,

a shapeless mass and a bag of tools;

and each must fashion your life is flown,

a stumbling block or a stepping stone.

Very often what we get in the beginning

is a large piece of stone. What do we do with it?

Do we create it into a beautiful "David"?

Chipping away the excess stone?

Or,is it a barrier to our success?

And very often it is up to us,as we co-create our reality.

The stone is there,we are not responsible for it;

but what we do with it,we are responsible for.

Cognitive reconstruction

is about learning to interpret things optimistically,

another words,in the positive light.

Ann Harbison,colleague of mine,

used to teach also with Philip Stone,

said that "never let a good crisis go to waste".

Crises have the potential through growth.

One of the books that we will talk about

when we talk about relationships is Passionate Marriage

by David Schnarch,who talks about crucibles in marriage.

And what he says is that ...the thriving relationships,

a relationships,not that have been,you know,

all fine and dandy for years. These usually fail after a while.

But the relationships that go through crucibles,

that have crises,disagreements and then,you know,

Thesis and Antithesis and then there is a Synthesis,

and there is a growth as a result of these hardships.

And he says that there is no other way,

again learn to fail or fail to learn,

there is no other way for a long-term success of a relationship.

Relationship does not,cannot look like this.

It has to have these ups and downs.

Never let a good crisis in a relationship go to waste.

That doesn't mean that every crisis needs to be resolved

and there are some that could end,and should end a relationship.

But most crises can be solved and need to be dealt with.

Same on individual level,work by Warren Bennis,

he is from USC,

taught for a few years here at the Business School,

has identified the leading leaders,

whether it's younger ones what he called,

whom he called "the geeks",the thirty-year-olds,or elder ones,

"the geezers" he called them.

He has a book called Geeks & Geezers,

where he talks about the differences

between the two leadership styles,approaches,passions,

interests and there are numerous differences.

For example,you know,

the geeks---the younger one talk about work-life balance,

the geezers don't know what he means by that.

You know it was usually,he,a man,

worked while the woman took care of the family and the man.

So that was for the geezers,for the older generation.

The younger generation,they talk about work-life balance

and how they can incorporate all the elements of their lives.

There are of course many more women in the geeks than the geezers

Numerous differences among the generation,one similarity.

All the great leaders,

whether they were thirty-year-old or eighty-five years old,

all of them had been through very rough crucibles

and leave to tell the tale.

Our most people go through crucibles,

but there are certain people

who are able to find benefit in these crucibles

and grow as a results.

Never let a good crisis go to waste,

whether it's professionally,whether it's interpersonally,

whether it's intra-personally in terms of

what you are experiencing.

But four years ago or five years ago,

when I was still a resident tutor in Leverett house,

and we had one of these pre-business events

where we talked about the upcoming year

and the recruiting and so on.

That particular year was a terrible year,

Goldman Sachs was laying off,wasn't recruiting on campus,

Credit Suisse,First Boston they were laying off as well,

Deutsche Bank,first time in his history was laying off employees

really bad market. And we talked about this,each of us gave it,

what should be about the market and what they can do,

very sober presentation. And then one of the students,

you know my students Sean Fieldscoy,was a senior then,

was sitting there,Had studied positive psychology there.

He put up his hand and said:

"Tal,you know,as...you know you portrait a very pessimistic

and negative picture,

but as a teacher of Positive Psychology

can you maybe shed some optimism here?" And you know,

few chuckles in the audience and then silence.

And everyone is looking at me,

I don't know what to say and my immediate reaction was to say

"Well Sean things happen for the best." Exactly. (laughs)

And then,

just before it came out of my mouth I said...I thought to myself,

"Actually I don't believe that."

I don't believe that things happen for the best.

But while I don't believe that things happen for the best,

I do believe that some people are able to make the best

of things that happen,and there is a very big difference here.

Because when I say "I'm not happy about what just happen here,

I don't like it,I much rather have the market be a good market,

where people are hiring,

where they all come to me on a silver platter and offer me a job.

Of course,I would much rather have that.

So things don't happen for the best necessarily,

but there are some people who accept the situation

and then are able to make the best of it.

The same with any crisis. Do you think the leaders,

whether they are the eighty- or ninety-year-olds,

invited those crucibles into their lives

want these crucibles to happen?

Do you think partners go into a relationship and say

"let's look for that crucible,

let's really fight so that we can have a healthy relationship"?

Of course not! But when it happens,

that's when they make the best of it.

You know,stuff happens,

and we can either let it pollute or make fertilizer out of it.

I want to show you an example once again of a leader,

who is a consummate benefit-finder.

[MUSIC]

Wow. We are honored to be talking with Neilson Mandela,

the former president of South Africa,whose unshakable courage,

his faith and integrity have inspired millions to see

what is possible in their own lives.

I've had the pleasure,the honor of meeting Mr. Mandela

on a couple of occasions before and I will tell you,

to be in his presence is really,to be in your presence

is like being a presence of royalty and grace at the same time.

I would think,I wonder how does a man spend 27 years in prison,

put there by an oppressor,

and come out of that experience with not a heart of stone,

not a cold heart

but a heart that is willing to forgive and embrace.

I remember talking to you one night of our dinner,

and you had said to me that our hatred for the oppressor

was so intense we did not see the value of talking to him.

So at what point did you see the value of letting go of that hatred

and begin the process of talking?

Well,let me say first,that is a great tragedy

to spend the best of your lives in prison.

But although it looks ironical,there are advantages in that.

If I had not been at the prison,I have not...

I would not be able to achieve the most difficult,

a task in life,and that is changing yourself.

I would not have an opportunity.

I had that opportunity because in prison you have

what we don't have in our work outside prison,

the opportunity to sit down and think,which is an important part

Did you need 27 years of it though?

You could have taken a few days,a week,a vacation.

Did you need 27 years?

Now,

did it happen for the best that he spent 27 years of his life?

Certainly when he experienced it,it was painful,it was awful,

but he was able to transform this.

And to,even in that situation,to see the positive.

And when we transform that,

those who know the history of what happen to him,

when he started to look at the positive,

even there are the opportunities in prison

when he changes his mind set. In other words,

not the external circumstances,

the external circumstances actually begin to change.

Another benefit-finder,

"a pessimist sees difficulty in every opportunity,

an optimist sees the opportunity in every difficulty."

And you don't want to argue with him.

I want to end by telling you a story,

a personal story about my experiences throughout the years.

Some biographical detail,

something that most of you did not know.

And I am going to tell it to you first

from the perspective of the fault-finder.

I have a mild case of ADD,

it makes things very difficult for me,

it's difficult for me to focus,my mind wanders often,

and I really struggle with it constantly.

When I was in high school,

I really wanted to get into a lucrative program in mathematics,

did not pass the entry exam,I was very disappointed,

I did not make it. Becoming a professional squash player

was a dream for me since the age of 11.

That is the thing that I thought about constantly,

that was the most important thing for me at the time.

I wanna to be a professional player.

At the age of twenty,

I was about to complete my military service in Israel

and I got injured on the squash court

and pulled the muscle in my back.

The doctor gave me an option of being operated on,

which was a big risk,or giving up my professional career.

I chose to give up my professional career,

a dream that I had from a very young age. It was a real blow.

I went to Cambridge,

after graduating from Harvard and I enrolled in a PhD program.

I was the only student in my PhD program to fail,

I was thrown out of the program. It was humiliating;

it seemed like a waste of a year

because I did not even get a master's degree.

It was a real tough experience.

At Harvard,as a graduate student,I took,

with all the other students,my qualifying general exams.

Out of all the graduate students who took that exam,

I was the only one who failed it.

Once again,a really humiliating experience,

walking around William James and everyone knows their results,

it was tough. Not only that,I was given provisional,

the provisional option of staying in the program.

They said to me,not only do you need to pass next year's exam

when you take it with the next class,

you have to pass it with flying colors or you are out.

So,while the rest of the semester,

while working on the dissertations,writing,

almost graduating I had to go back to the basics

and go over the whole material again.

God,I am so unlucky.

I want to share with you some biographical facts about my life,

you know,I have a mild case of ADD,

which is great,you know why?

Because,it actually forces me to only study things

that I love,things that I care about,

because anything else,my concentration just goes away.

So it's like,I have an internal mechanism

that forces me to focus on the ultimate currency,

on things that make me happy. And

I only study things that I'm passionate about,it is wonderful.

You know,when I was in high school,

I really wanted to get into a certain program,

in a very lucrative program,and I didn't get in,

I failed the entrance exam,

which turned out to be a blessing in disguise,

because it gave me so much more time to practice and play squash,

and I ended up winning international championships

in the following year,

which I wouldn't have done had I been in that program.

When I was in the University of Cambridge,

I was in a PhD program,and I was the only one in my class,

and as far as I know,

the only one in years to be thrown out of the program.

And it was actually a very important experience,you know,

I got out of Harvard,I was arrogant,

I thought I was holier than thou,

and this was a real humbling experience

that was especially important for me,

because the next year I went to work in Asia,

and there,the worst that I could do was to be arrogant.

So this humbling experience actually helped me

a great deal in my future career,

as well as helped me put things in perspective.

When I came to Harvard,I was the only one in my program

to fail the general qualifying exams,

it was a hard blow,it was difficult,

but it turned out to be a very good experience,you know why?

Because I had to study the exact same material

and these huge books and articles all over again,

and know them not just at the basic level,

I had to know them extremely well because that was the condition

that the professors gave for me staying in the program.

And it was so good because I learned the material so well

that I know social psychology today probably

better than anyone I know,and that helps me a great deal.

It helps me a great deal in putting together this course 1504,

and there is no place I would rather be than here.

God,I am so lucky.

Thank you. Same reality,different interpretations.

Just remember,much of what we experience,

we co-create. See you next week.

