Dr.Tal Ben-Shahar:Hi.Good morning.

So first of all,are there any junior parents today?

Welcome.Welcome.I'm so glad you are here.

I'm even gladder you weren't here on Tuesday.

So just...just...Just a couple of announcements.

Yeah,you know,I was asking myself after Tuesday,

"are they ever going to take me seriously again?" I hope so.

Or "will they love me tomorrow?"

So just a couple of announcements.

First,there are many emails regarding the response papers,

whether the gratitude letters that you write,

you also need to submit to your,to your TF,

as the response paper.So the answer is yes and no.

Alright,next.Yes! You do need to submit it.

However,if the letter is too personal

or you don't feel comfortable for any reason submitting

to your TF as well,

just send your TF a note saying "I wrote the letter"

and we will take your word for it.

And...so you don't have to submit it,

though it would be great if you do.

The midterm is coming up in a week and a half.

So just a couple of words about the midterm.

What we have decided to do

is to just have a multiple choice midterm.

There'll be - can't remember how many - 50? Five zero.

50 questions on the multiple choice.

And you'll have 75 minutes to do it.

So we'll allow for the 10 minutes

or 15 minutes to get organized here.

It's not going to be a difficult,you know...

Try to fool you or to catch you.

It's going to be pretty straight forward.

I've told you my philosophy about exams during the first class,

those of you who remember.

In the past,I didn't used to have an exam

because I remember I wasn't happy taking exams as an undergrad.

And you know do not do unto others.

But then,I realize that there was the value to them.

Not a value in terms of differentiation,

grades and stuff,all that.

The value is that the midterm or final gets you to sit down

and synthesize all the material.

So if it's a take home,you look for the answers where you are.

You take...you just get part of it.

With the midterm or final,

you sit down and you read everything from lesson 1 to lesson 26.

And then that helps you synthesize

and hence internalize the material.

Because remember what I mentioned time and again:

this class is built around the spiral theory of knowledge,

meaning everything we talked about in lesson 1,in class 1,

is related to class 3,is related to class 7,

is related to class 24.Everything is interconnected.

And it's when you sit down,

you know when I talk about the material,I know

it's going to come three weeks from now and I know the connection

You still don't,but when you sit down and study for the exam,

that's when you get to make the connection,

and that's when you really internalize the material

at a much higher level.So this is why we have it.

I know it's not fun however I think it is pedagogically.

It is important to sit down and have a run through,

whether it's the midterm and again,for the final.

Again,won't be difficult,but do study for it.

It would be very straightforward,fact-based.

The midterm,as you can imagine,is not about showing creativity.

Our goal is that you go over the material and synthesize it.

If you have any questions,

please email your TFs and they'll be able to answer.

If not,then email me.

OK.So where were we last time? Actually can't remember.

I think I repress the whole lesson.

But I was told that I skipped a few things

so that I could get to the show at the end.

And one thing that I skipped and I want to talk about go back to,

after we talked about the body feedback hypothesis.

You remember the body feedback hypothesis?

How you shake your hand,how you carry yourself.

With the facial feedback hypothesis,with your smile,your frown.

That communicates certain message to other people,

who then reflect back to us and at the same time,

we are also communicating to ourselves.

Am I confident? or am I proud? Or am I afraid and scared?

And very often we need to,

as we talk about "fake it till we make it".

Because our body,our behavior sends messages to our mind,

to our emotions and affects them.

There was a wonderful research done

by Haemmerlie and second author,Montgomery.

Haemmerlie and Montgomery did the following research.

They recruited shy heterosexual men.

Recruited them for the study.Shy,heterosexual men.

And the study was run as follow:

these men were told that the study was about taking certain test

and they were invited into the equivalent of William James Hall,

and they were told "unfortunately we were running behind,

so you have to wait.

You have to wait until the study actually takes place.

In the mean time,you know here is a waiting room

and there are other people waiting for the same test.

And we'll come and get you.

It may take a while.Sorry.

We'll pay you for it for the time you have to wait extra."

So they ended up waiting in a waiting room.

And with them was waiting another person.

A female,who unbeknownst to them was actually a confederate,

was actually a part of the study.

But they thought she was just like them,waiting,

also waiting in line for the study to take place.

So they were sitting there for 12 minutes with a woman,

whose instruction was to strike up a conversation

with this shy heterosexual man,and to express a lot of interest

and excitement about what they were saying.

So they were listening and they were asking questions.

"Wow." "Really?"

They were laughing at what they were saying for 12 minutes.

And then,that,

the woman went into the experiment or so they thought.

Another woman comes in.Again,for 12 minutes,

she sits down with the shy heterosexual man

and seems very interested and laughs at what he has to say,

and asks questions.

And so on and so...for 12 minutes.

And the next woman comes in,as she goes into the experiment.

And so on.Six times.

Six women sitting with the shy heterosexual men,

being very interested in what they have to say,

striking a conversation.72 minutes total.

And then they go into the real experiment,whatever it was.

And then next day,

they are invited for the same experiment again.

And once again,they go through the exact same procedure.

For 72 minutes,they sit down with 6 women

who are very interested in what they have to say.

And of course,what really the experiment was interested in

was what effect does this have.

What effect does this behavior have on their shyness?

And it had radical effects.

So over the next 6 months,when they followed upon these,

these men suddenly became far less anxious.

In general,and specifically around women.

They became less shy.

These men often for the first time in their lives,

initiate relationships and start to date

after 144 minutes of intervention.

Radical difference.But there was a problem.

What's the problem with many of these psychological experiment?

That you have to debrief.

Exactly.You have to debrief.

So six months later,the study was over.

The researchers invite the men in

and tell them this was just a study.

And these women were actually part of the experiment-

they were told to seem interested.

Cruel,right? Well,less than they thought.

It made no difference to these men.

Because by this time,they were much more outgoing.

They were doing well with the opposite sex.

They were going on dates.They were less shy.

It started a positive spiral.It didn't matter at all.

144 minutes changed their lives,

as far as the dating was concerned at least,if not more.

Why? Think back to Bandura's work on self-efficacy.

Nothing breeds success like success.

When they succeeded,they did well,

they saw themselves doing well- self-perception theory.

Certain conclusions about who they are,

what they are and that led to an upward spiral,

and continued that upward spiral.

Yeah,we talked about 'fake it till we make it',

then watch Marva Collins.

Chapters of the Fathers.Pirkei Avot.

One of the seminal Jewish texts:

"Those whose deeds exceed their wisdom,their wisdom shall endure

but those whose wisdom exceeds their deeds,

their wisdom shall not endure.”

If we just- remember what I talked about-

if we just go to a workshop or a class,

and understand it on the cognitive level,

even have an ah ha moment,a break through,nothing will happen,

unless we follow our new found wisdom

or understanding with deeds,with action.Why?

Because we first make our habits,and then our habits make us.

And if we are before the workshop or class here,

and then our attitude changes but our behavior doesn't,

our attitude will be pulled down over time by our habits.

So it's only,if we also change our habits over time,

if we start doing things,if we,for example,

put ourselves on the line- cope.

Or if we start doing the gratitude exercise

or writting letters on the regular basis,

or starting physical exercise-

arguably being most powerful intervention,

to deal with anxiety,depression as well as the ADHD.

And that's when we start doing these things

right after the change is going to be ephemeral

we are going to go back to where we were before.

Lasting,permanent change-

attitude change has to be matched by deeds,by behavior.

Dan Millman- I mentioned him in class a couple of weeks ago,

The way of peaceful warrior,

talks about the importance of action and change.

He says,quote,"To change the course of your life,

choose one of two basic methods.

One.You can direct your energy

and attention toward trying to fix your mind,find your focus,

affirm your power,

free your emotions and visualize positive outcomes so that

you can finally develop the confidence to display the courage

to discover the determination to make the commitment

to feel sufficiently motivated to do what it is you need to do.

Two.Or you can just do it."

You know,sometimes,easier said than done.

However,very often,

you know,jumping into the water,just doing it,

taking action has the same effect as all the preparation,

or even the better effect,and leads to an upward spiral.

OK.Then we talked about coping and exiting your comfort zone.

Parents,please close your eyes at this point.Alright.

And I ended by talking about attaining your

'optimum levels of discomfort'.

What does this mean? What does this mean?

So we can look at approaches to change or reactions to change,

behavioral change along the continuum of tension.

Most of us most of the time are in our comfort zone.

It's great.It's wonderful.However,

when we are in the comfort zone,very little change happens.

If you go beyond that,we get to our stretch zone.

This is what we call the optimal discomfort zone.

This is where change actually happens.

Beyond that is the panic zone.

This is where we have anxiety and difficulty.

This is the place that is usually unhealthy.

Unhealthy for change.

Because very often,we can go back on where we were before.

You can think about this with a metaphor:

the comfort zone would be freezing water.

The stretch zone would be flowing water.

The panic zone would be boiling water.

Again,a lot of movement,

but out of control and potentially dangerous.

The best way to be usually is in the stretch zone.

You'll read about it next week when you read about flow.

Flow is when you have optimal level of arousal,

optimal level of tension.

When the task that you are doing,or whatever you are doing,

is not too difficult nor too easy.

See what I did at the end of last class was certainly,

as I said,as you saw I hope,out of my comfort zone.

However,it wasn't enough- well,maybe-

but probably not in the panic zone.

Why? Because I already know you-

we have been together for over a month.

It's already passed at the drop date- so,too late for you.

So I wasn't taking that much of the risk.

It was just stretching.And it was important for me to do...

I mean,really personally important for me to do it.

Because it does stretch me

and get me more in touch with my humanity.

Or for example,let's say you want to start an exercise in gym.

You realize how important it is.You read the research.

You are exposed to that research

and you see it really has an important effect.

And you start exercising.

Well,if you have an exercise for 5 years

and you got to start running 8 miles a day.

That's a problem.

You are over-stretching.You'll probably get injured.

If you continue sitting in front of the TV or playing gameboy,

that's also not good for change.

That's the comfort zone perhaps not good.

Stretch will be "OK,let me start with walking

for two miles a day and build it up gradually."

Stretch myself,but not too much.

Or if you think about starting to give lectures to others,

paying it forward,in positive psychology or biology,

whatever your topic is,

and you get anxious in front of an audience.

You don't start giving a lecture in Sanders Theatre.

You start initially with your friends,teammates.

This is how I start with my squash teammates.

I gave the first lecture to them and then I gave it to my family.

Gradually out of the comfort zone.

A little bit of stretch and then build it over time.

This is the health way of approaching change.

Sometimes though,sometimes though,

we have to go to the panic zone.

why? Because something cannot be changed,

or almost impossible to change gradually.

For example,addiction.

If I'm addicted to drugs,it's very difficult to say,

"well I'll just have a little bit less,

inject a little bit less today.A little bit less tomorrow."

It usually has to be abrupt.And then we are in the boiling realm.

Then we are in the panic zone.

Quite literally at times,which is why we need help.

In this area,we need someone to hold us.

Someone to comfort us.Someone to protect us.

Because it is such a volatile zone.

And potentially dangerous.

But generally,if you want to change,

the healthy approach to change would be along the stretch zone.

It's impossible to change in theory.

Now I have said it so many times and yet very often people

who take the class,as you know,many of them do change.

Many of them do say,

"well my life is better today for having taken it."

And other people say,

"well I took the class and it didn't make a difference in my life

It was a fun experience at times- the pink shirt and others.

But it didn't make a real lasting difference in my life."

In every...almost all- not in all cases,but in almost all cases,

it's because it wasn't behavioral change associated

with the attitudinal change or with the insides

or understandings or recognition.

There has to be a bias for action.

And that bias for action- just name a few examples:

to increase confidence- we do it by taking risks,

not by talking and thinking about,

or standing in front of the mirror and say to myself:

"I have a lot of confidence.I have self-esteem.

I'm great.I'm terrific.I'm gorgeous." Not enough.

How do we reduce stress in our lives?

And we'll talk about it next week.

By simplifying,by doing less rather than more.

We'll talk about how actually doing less at times

doesn't just lead to more happiness,

it also leads to more success,

more creativity as well as productivity.

But we can't reduce the stress in theory.

Chipping away through the gratefulness,

creating more positive channels,

becoming more of a benefit finder over time.

It takes time.Doesn't happen overnight.

The nice thing though is that when we are afraid,

when we think it's too much for us to take certain action,

we can use our internal simulator.

Remember the mind doesn't know the difference

between the real thing and the imaginary thing?

And if we imagine something,if we are in the CBT language,

if we engage in exposure,

either through the imagination or through actual action,

when we engage in exposure,over time,we become confident,

which as I told you,what I do,preparing for lectures,

seeing myself,doing it in my mind's eye,

and the mind doesn't know the difference,

in the real and in the imagined.

And overtime,we'll become more confident.

It's a good start.It's not enough.

But certainly goes hand in hand

and a very useful technique to explore and to try.

So all this is well and good.

I'm sure some of you are thinking about,

and actually some came after class last time

and talked to me about it and said,

"OK,so we know action is important,but there is a problem.

And the problem is that I don't or many people don't have

enough discipline to engage in this action,

to get out and run three times or five times a week.

We are lazy.

It's much more fun playing with our Nintendo

than going and doing yoga for an hour,at least initially.

So I don't have enough discipline for change.

I just want a quick show of hands.Be honest.

Put up your hand if you believe that

if you had more self-discipline-

now you may have a lot of self-discipline

or very little self-discipline,

but if you had more self-discipline,

you could potentially be happier and/or more successful.

If you had more self-discipline? Be honest.

I mean my hand is very much up.

OK,so it's most people think that.

So I have good news for you and bad news for you.

I'll start with the bad,

because I'd like to finish on the positive.

So the bad news is

you aren't going to get any more self-discipline.

What you have is what you got and what you will get.

That's it.Sorry.Tough luck.

Most people,most people,overwhelmingly majority of people

think they need or want more self-discipline

and believe that they don't have enough.

And most,

just about all people cannot get any more self-discipline.

Nature.That's it.So that's the bad news.

The good news: it's actually not that important,

neither for success,nor for happiness.

You can be more successful and happier with the self-discipline

that you currently have.

How? If you change your focus from relying on self-discipline

for bringing about change to introducing rituals.

Changing your focus from self-discipline to rituals.

I am going to talk about an idea now that is part of...

that is talked about in greater length

in The Power of Full Engagement by Jim Loehr and Tony Schwartz.

An excellent,excellent book.

And what they are talking about is essentially a paradigm shift.

A paradigm shift,

where we need to stop trying to get more self-discipline,

because that,in and of itself is not enough for success,

for well-being,for change.

And it's because people rely on self-discipline for change.

That is the reason why

most organizational as well as individual change efforts fail.

So let me share with you a fun study.

This was done by Roy Baumeister,

one of the leading social psychologists of the 20th

and the beginning of the 21st century.

Great researcher.Here was what he did.

He brought in a group of people individually.

So the person walks into the experiment.

And they are told,once again,"you have to wait in this room,

waiting room for the experiment to start.

So the person sits down.

There is a table right next to that person.

And on the table,there's a bowl.

And in the bowl,there are freshly baked chocolate chip cookies.

Just came out of the oven.

Smell the aroma,engulfing them.

You know like those cartoons,going into their nose.

Phenomenal smell.

They are sitting there,

next to the chocolate chip cookies that are in a bowl.

The experimenter puts and says,

"I'll come and pick you about 10 minutes for the experiment."

They walk out.And as they are walking out,they tell them,

"oh just by the way,these chocolate chip cookies,

they are for the next experiment.

So if you don't mind,don't touch them."

So you are sitting there,almost dying,

but you are not touching it.

And ten minutes later,

the experimenter does come in,takes you to the experiment.

The experiment is very difficult.

Very difficult.Very difficult test that you need to take.

A test that most people don't solve

and requires a lot of perseverance and hard work.

But most people,

even with perseverance and hard work do not solve it.

So the outcome measure,

what the researcher is interested in is mostly

how much did you persevere before giving up on that test.

How much did you persevere before giving up on that test?

That was the outcome measure,the dependent variable.

Second group,randomly picked,come into the same room,

sitting on the same chair,have the same bowl on the table.

But instead of chocolate chip cookies,

what they have in the bowl are red beetroots.

Freshly baked.Just came out of the oven.

And they are sitting there.

And the experimenter is about to walk out,says,

"just one more thing.

If you don't mind,don't touch those beetroots.

They are for the next experiment." OK.Fine.

So you are sitting there for 10 minutes.

10 minutes later,the experimenter comes in,

takes you to the "real" experiment.

Sitting down,you take the exact same test.

The exact same puzzle.

And once again,how long will you persevere before giving up?

Think about for yourself for a second.

Who do you think persevered more?

The chocolate chip cookies group? Or the beetroots group?

Think for yourself for a second.

By the way,I guessed wrong when I answered this question.OK.

Significantly more perseverance- significantly more,

wasn't close-

the group that had the beetroots persevered a lot more.

Why? I wouldn't understand.

The mechanism-

and he did some more experiment to explain the mechanism.

It's because the chocolate chip cookie group

had used self-discipline not to touch the cookies,

though (inaudible) they really wanted to touch it.

But they couldn't.So they used their quota of self-discipline.

And when they went into the "real" experiment,

what happened was that they had little or no self-discipline left

And that,that maze,that experiment,

that test required a lot of self-discipline.

The point of this study is

we all have limited amount of self-discipline.

And the question is what do we used it on.

Another question for you.

How many people here have,

those of you who did set new year resolutions?

Put your hand up if you fulfilled every single one

of the new year's resolutions that you ever set for yourself.

Put your hand up.

Every single new year's resolution,

if you did set new year resolutions.

A bit higher,please.Well,I certainly didn't.

But here's another question for you.

How many people here...this is an important question,

so please,please put your hand up if the answer is affirmative.

How many people here brush their teeth this morning?

Put your hand up high.Phew! I'm glad to see this.

You can all talk to me after,real close.

So let me just imagine what happened this morning,this scenario.

So you got up in the morning.You were tired.

And then you said to yourself,

"OK,today is the day.Today is the day.

I am going to do it! I am going to brush my teeth this morning!"

Right? And to really motivate you as you got out of bed :

Here I come now! I mean,here I come to brush...

And you brush your teeth,right? Today is the day!

Because I have 1504! I'm going to brush my teeth!

Yes! No,of course not.

You know,you rolled off the bed- you know,barely alive.

You probably don't remember you brushed your teeth,

because you were asleep still.

You know why? Why did everyone,

I think,I hope everyone brush their teeth this morning,

whereas no one,no one person out of more than 600 students

fulfilled their new year's resolutions? Why?

Because new year resolutions rely on self-discipline.

Brushing our teeth relies on a ritual.

We do it everyday.It's automatic.

Now there are rituals- we know brushing our teeth is important.

People won't talk to us if we don't.

But we also know that physical exercise is very important.

And yet most people in the world,

not at Harvard,but in the world,

don't do physical exercise and pay very high price for it.

You know it always amazed me

when people used to comment on my incredible self-discipline

when I was a squash player.

It always amazed me

because I don't see myself as a person with self-discipline.

You know we don't have chocolate chip cookies at home.

And if we do,Tommy hides them.

Because if there were,they would disappear two minutes later.

Zero self-discipline when it comes to these things.

And yet,with squash,I did have,well people thought

and what I thought for many years- self-discipline.

Because I would get up in the morning and go for my run.

I would then go to school and after school,straight to the court

have a session with my coach- regular session with my coach,

then play games,matches,and then as you can see,

went to the gym and worked out.

Every single day.

And I went home,did my homework and went to bed.

It was a ritual.That is what athletes do: they have rituals,

which is why they are able to maintain

what seems from the outside,such high levels of discipline,

at times superhuman's.

It's not.It's rituals.

Jim Loehr and Tony Schwartz:

"Building rituals requires defining very precise behaviors

and performing them at very specific times —

motivated by deeply held values."

Let me give you some personal examples.

Physical exercise deeply held value for me.

Has always been,and especially now when I know the research,

the data on physical exercise.

So I have a ritual:

three times a week,for 30 and 40 minutes,I run.

After that,after that,do my stretching.

I know how important yoga and meditation is for me.

I have a ritual and I do it.

First thing when I wake up in the morning,a few deep breaths-

We'll talk about it more after break.

It's a ritual.

Every time when I teach here,

every time when I get up in front of the audience,I run before.

This morning,I ran.

On Tuesday,I ran twice as hard.

Why? Because it releases anxiety.It helps me.

Globally,generally and specifically for the class.

Another very important value for me: my wife- our relationship.

See the movie? Hitch? Fantastic movie.

It's a very important value for me.

And therefore,my wife and I have rituals.

And we have two ritual dates a week.

Now when people hear it,they say,

"Come on! where is the spontaneity of love?"

Well,there is a lot of spontaneity in terms of

what we do during these dates.

But the dates are set in stone.

And if I'm travelling or my wife is travelling,

we miss the date,we make up for it after.

Why? Because if we didn't have this ritual,

then we have two dates a decade,as opposed to a week.

And a deeply held value for both of us is our relationship.

In our modern world,

there are so many conflicting demands in our time.

Rituals are not just important- they are absolutely necessary.

If we are to do the things that are important for us,

that we care about.

Other examples of rituals: writing a thank you note.

Once a week,once a month.Making a gratitude visit.

Once a month,once a month,once every two months.

Doing the gratitude exercise on a daily basis.

These are rituals that we can introduce

and can actually make an important difference.

We also have ritual dinners with the family as a whole.

So every shabbat dinner,Friday night dinner,

we have together with the family.

It's a ritual.It's a wonderful ritual.

During the week,we also have dates when we are together,

because family is an important value to us.

Now sometimes,for example,

because of travel or other reasons,rituals are broken.

Then you can make up for it later.

They can also be negative rituals.

Three hour of not checking email.

I know it's hard.But it's an important ritual.

And we'll talk about the effect of having our email on constantly

Because when we are constantly connected to technology,

we are often disconnected from the important things in our lives.

We'll talk about that after break.

Rituals.Introduce rituals.

One of the fears that people have

when they hear about rituals is they say

"well that will take away from my productivity.

And if not productivity,creativity." Not so.

In fact,the exact opposite is the case.

If you look,- yeah,this is a historical research-

if you look at all the great artists,whether it's writers,

the Hemingways,whether it's the Davincis-

they had a ritual in their life.

And the ritual was,for example,

"from 7 to 10 am in the morning,I write,no matter what",

"6 to 10 at night- if I am more of a night person,I paint".

They had rituals.And

it's because of these rituals that they were able to be creative.

Because then they could think about their subject materials

as opposed to million other things:

"Well,maybe I should be doing something else

and there are other distractions"- no! There was a ritual.

That's what I did now.

Almost mindless getting there- just like we brush our teeth.

But when they were there,there were space,

openness to be creative.

Now the key is to give yourself time to create the ritual.

You see,maintaining a ritual,

requires some self-discipline,but not a lot.

Creating a ritual requires a lot of self-discipline.

Once again,because we go back to our old habits.

Let's do a quick exercise.

So I want you to just take your hands and just fold them.

Fold your hands for a minute.

Alright.Now continue folding your hands- only this time,

in the opposite direction,

meaning this hand below and this hand above.

Yeah.Yeah.

I see especially the men are not really getting it.

But it's OK.

Now how does that feel? Not comfortable right?

Now this is such a simple movement.

You know,folding hands!

And yet we feel very uncomfortable- something is wrong here.

And we want to go back to our folding before.

Much more comfortable.

We first make our habits and then our habits make us.OK.

So the key is,

here we are talking about a very simple change- folding hands.

How much more difficult is it

when we have had habits that we cultivated for many years

and are much more significant in our lives?

Very difficult to go...to change them.It takes time.

William James,as I mentioned before,

says it takes 21 days to change a habit.

Loehr and Schwartz in their book,The Power of Full Engagement,

talk about 30 days to change it.

And of course it depends on what habit.

So give ourselves 30 days to start the gratitude.

Give ourselves 30 days

to build the new ritual of exercising regularly.

And the key is

to give yourself no more than one or two rituals each 30 days.

Why? Because as we mentioned earlier,

it takes a lot of self-discipline to create a ritual

and we don't have much self-discipline,

which is why when we have a list of 10 changes that

we want to introduce in our lives today,we end up doing none.

We end up doing none.

Because we are over-extending our self-discipline

and we break down.

It takes a lot of discipline to start a ritual,

but once we start it,after a month when it's habituated,

when it's grooved in,when the neural pathway has begun to form,

then we can move onto the next ritual and introduce it,

if we are ready.

No more than two.Ideally one ritual.

Next week in your response paper,

you are going to choose a ritual,

two rituals for this month that hopefully you will,

you will also introduce.

Because there cannot be change without behavioral change.

Loehr and Schwartz:

"Incremental change is better than ambitious failure.

Success feeds on itself." We see it on individual level.

We see it on organizational level.

John Carter from the business school does a lot of work on change

in organizations in the realm of leadership.

What he talks about a lot is how you need small successes

and then build them these successess.

The Dalai Lama:"There isn't anything that isn't made easier

through constant familiarity and training.

Through training we can change; we can transform ourselves." 	

You know,

one thing that happened to me when I was an undergraduate.

It happened in my sophomore year.

I didn't...I played at the Varsity team.

Didn't have a good season.

My sophomore year was burned out- got injured.

And couldn't wait for the 1st of March.

March 1 is the last,and March 2 sometimes,

is the last day of the season.

And I couldn't wait,because after that

I could stop playing squash and focus on my studies.

Then I could get a lot of work done- because with squash,

we were at the courts,you know trained physically for two hours

but total three hours a day.

Weekends- we were travelling mostly or had matches at home.

Mornings- at least two mornings a week

we were lifting weights or in the gym.

So it was rough.A lot of work

and I said I can't wait to have the freedom without squash,

especially giving that I wasn't enjoying that much at that point.

Can't wait.Not to do anymore and just to focus on my classes.

Catch up on all the readings and writings and stuff.

March 1 came.I stopped playing completely.

And instead of becoming more productive.

I became far less productive.

Now I see a lot of you nodding.

The athletes know what I am talking about.

Why? Why did I become more,or rather less productive?

Procrastination- wow! Skyrocketed.

Why? Because for years I've been told

I'm a person with self-discipline.

And I started to believe it.

Yeah,I have a lot of self-discipline.

Look at me! I trained so hard.I worked,you know,

when I played on the circus six hours a day.

That's a lot of self-discipline!

And suddenly,the squash season ended.

And I said,"alright,let's see this discipline at work!"

And I wasn't getting any work done.

Why? Because I gave up my rituals.

You see,during the season,those of you

who played varsity or very involved in music or club know that-

when you are investing a lot in a certain organization,

your time has to be ritualized.

So you know you are in practice then or you are ?

in these hours,or you are having meetings at these hours.

And after that you have to go back and work.

Because you only have two hours to do.

And you want to get an OK night sleep.

You have rituals.And you are productive and you are creative.

And suddenly the rituals go away.

You said,"OK now I'm gonna work more".

The exact opposite happens.Because we have a limited amount...

It was only when I came to terms of fact

that I have a limits amount of self-discipline.

It's only when I came to terms with the human nature-

nature should be commanded must be obeyed.

It was only then that I actually became productive.

Because I created new rituals in my life after that.

Rituals- very important and significant.

The only way for lasting change.

Let me talk about cognition now.The C.

So we talked about affect- the emotions; we talked about behavior

how important that is both acute and gradual.

Let's talk about cognition.

We'll talk again about cognitive reconstruction

which is the gradual way of bringing about change.

And then we'll talk about the fast way of bringing about change,

which is the Eureka experience,the ah ha moment.

So first,cognitive reconstruction.

As we mentioned before,an interpretation is a neural pathway.

If I interpret the world as a fault finder,

the fortified neural pathway in my brain are the negative ones,

these in experience

and I go immediately to the negative interpretation

and that gets reinforced over time.

If I'm a merit finder,I would look the exact same experiences

and interpret them very differently.

Because I have very different neural pathways in the brain.

Of course,

there are consequences to how we interpret our experiences.

Not necessarily that things happen for the best,

but as a merit,as a benefit finder- sorry,I change that.

As a benefit finder,looking more at the,

at the positive with each experience.

Now remember the study on the identical twins

and how much genes actually matter.

That only account for 55% of the variance.

So here is the story that's told in many intro to psych textbooks

And it's about twins who were raised in a same home

and their father was abusive toward them,toward their mother.

He was very often drunk,very often on drugs,

and really an awful,awful childhood- the worst you can imagine.

And these twins grow up in that home with that father.

And they go off.They leave their home,

run away from home later on in life and they reach the age of 30.

And then at the age of 30,a psychologist

who is doing research on twins goes and visits them.

And he goes to the first twin.

And what he sees there: the twin is in a relationship.

He's abusing his family,very often drunk,very often on drugs.

Then the psychologist is able to find him in

a moment of soberness and says to the twin,

"what's going on? What are you doing? What's happening here?"

And the twin who knows

that the psychologist is doing research on the effect of genes

and the effect of upbringing,says,"you know my father.

You know the kind of childhood that I endured.

How do you expect me to be any other way?"

And the psychologist who knows the effect of upbringing shrugs.

And then he goes to the second twin.

The second twin happens to be at the exact same age

as the first one.

He goes to the second twin- also 30 years old,

walks into the house and cannot believe his eyes.

Such peace.Such equanimity.Such love.

Between him and his wife,and the kids.

He's doing well in his career,doing well with his family.

He comes back again after a while- see maybe there was a fluke;

maybe he's putting on a show,but no- it's the real thing.

Phenomenal family life.Phenomenal professional life.

And he goes to him and says,in disbelief,"how?"

Now the twin also knows that he's doing research and he says,

"what do you mean 'how'? You know my father.

You know how I was raised.You know what he did to us.

How do you expect me to be any other way?

I know how much he hurt us.

How do you expect me to be any other way like him?"

Same experiences.Monozygotic twins.Same genes.

Radically different interpretation: one continuing the hell

that he endured as a child; the other creating a heaven.

All because of interpretation.

What do you do with it? Well,I have no choice.

This is the way I was raised.

This is the model- passive victim.

The other- I'm not going to be like that.

I'm not going to be like my father- active agent.

So much of it is a matter of interpretation.

Happiness,wellbeing,as we mentioned many times before,

is not so much contingent on external circumstances,

not so much contingent on our status

or the status of our bank account.

It's contingent on our state of mind.

The thing that you'll remember though is that

there are no shortcuts unfortunately.

There are no quick fixes unfortunately.

If there were,I promise you I would've told you.

If I find out next week about a shortcut,

even if it's over spring break,you'll get an email from me.

But I don't think there are.And very often,

the hope of finding a quick fix leads to more unhappiness.

Here are some examples of cognitive reconstruction.

This is work done by Tomaka on

whether we perceive activity as a challenge or as a threat.

Because we can perceive the exact same activity

and cognitively reconstruct our understanding of it.

So let me give you an example.

When I,after being thrown out of Cambridge,

I applied for PHD programs.

One of the programs I applied to is here.

I was hoping to get in.

And when I got in,I wanted to come back,because overall,

I had a very good experience here as an undergrad,

with all the difficulties and hardship,

I was glad,wanting to be back.

And when I got in,

you know suddenly I became a little bit concerned.

Because I said-

you know I experienced a lot of anxiety as an undergrad.

A lot of anxiety as an undergrad.

And I said,I don't want to relive that again.

Maybe I should go else where.

And then I turned around and I said,

"OK.Instead of looking at Harvard as a threat,to me,to my calm.

I'm going to look at it as a challenge."

And my challenge became explicitly-

I mean I wrote it in my journal,

wrote about it,thought about it explicitly.

My goal over the six years that I got my PHD was to maintain calm

Because I said to myself,"if I can maintain calm at Harvard,

I can maintain calm anywhere."

And I worked on it.I really worked on it.

And it became a challenge and just that change helped me

get so much more out of my experience here as a graduate student.

Even through the hardships,

the generals and the failures,and the anxiety.

But overall- a much better experience.

Recently I just did it.

So you know,once in a while I travel right after class.

So three weeks ago,I travelled to Florida.

And I have a very important talk there

with the company that I really wanted to work with.

It was my first event there.Company that I cared about.

And I think it is doing fantastic things around the world

and I really want it to do well.

And I felt a lot of anxiety before that talk.

And I cognitively reconstructed it.

I said,"OK.It's anxiety inducing,

permission to be human experience,

but let's look at it as a challenge."

That I have this wonderful opportunity to speak

to such a great company,such wonderful people.

I'm going to make the best of it.

Turned it from a threat into a challenge,into opportunity.

And that made a big difference in my approach to it.

Think about as in your life.

What is it? Is it a play you want to try out for?

Is it someone you want to ask out? Is it speaking up in section?

This is a study those

who take Psych 1 or Psych 15 have encountered that,

the work of Schachter & Singer,back in early 60s.Today

it would never be able to get this past the ethics committee.

Just like Milgram wouldn't be able to get his study passed.

Here was what they did.

So they brought people into the experiment

and injected them with epinephrine.

Epinephrine arouses the body.

It...shots of adrenaline.

But they thought it was just vitamin C.

They didn't know it's epinephrine.

And then they were sitting in the experiment,

waiting again for the "real" experiment.

They were sitting in the waiting room.

And while they were sitting

they were asked to fill out a questionnaire.

Now remember,they just got a shot of adrenaline,

but they didn't know they got a shot of adrenaline.

So they were sitting,filling in a questionnaire.

And in the first condition,

the questionnaire had very provocative questions,

to say the least.

For example,one of these questions was so

"how many men did your mom sleep with

before she got married to your dad?"

That's one of the que...You know

they would never be able to get away with this study today,

but you know,back in the 60s.So they were answering this.

Now next to them,next to them,there is a confederate-

someone who they don't know is part of the study.

And this guy is going ballistic.

"How dare they" You know...Really getting angry.

And you get angry too.

And you get even angrier than the control group

who went through the exact same thing,

except for the fact that they didn't get the injection.

So what they did was they looked,

they saw their bodies is getting very aroused

and they interpreted this arousal as "oh I must be really angry".

And they really did get,even angrier than they would have.

They got angry in the control group as well

but less angry than those who were injected the epinephrine.

Now second condition.Also injected.

Had a questionnaire without any provocative questions.

And next to them there was again a confederate,

whom they thought was also doing the experiment.

And that confederate found by happenstance,

a hula hoop on the floor and started to shake it.

You know,dance and...

You know it was going crazy- they are happy and laughing.

And the person who was just injected epinephrine went wild.

So happy and joyous- much more happy than the control group,

who were in the room with a person dancing with a hula hoop,

but did not get the injection.

In other words,he interpreted the raising in adrenaline

"Oh I must be really happy now".And they were really happier.

In other words,very often it's the interpretation- in this case,

of a physical symptom that determines what we will feel.

Joy or anger.Because they are quite similar.

In both of them,there is an adrenaline rush.

So how do we interpret a situation as an arousal or,

as euphoria or as anger?

Here's another study.

This is done by Lee Ross and his colleagues.

They asked people,college students- he's from Stanford-

college students to volunteer their most generous,

benevolent friends to name them and their most competitive,

cut-throat friends and tell them who they are.

And they contacted them to be part of the study.

And what they wanted to see was their behavior in a situation

in a game where you can cooperate or you can be competitive.

The intervention was that these students,

randomly divided into two groups.

And in the two groups,

there were people who were deemed very competitive

or people who were deemed very generous and benevolent.

And in the second group,

same thing- half of the people were very generous and benevolent;

half of the people were very,very competitive and cut-throat,

as perceived by their friends.

And in the first group,they got a game and the game was called

"the community game".

And the second group got the exact same game,the game

where you have the opportunity either to cooperate or to compete.

But instead of a community game,

even though it was the exact same game,

it was called "Wall Street game".

And they wanted to see how many people cooperate versus

how many people compete.

And they wanted to see what predicts it.

Well,whether the kids,the participants,

were deemed cooperative or competitive,predicted nothing.

Nothing.Whether or not they would compete or cooperate.

What predicted everything was whether

they were in the "community game" or in the "Wall Street game".

If they were in the "community game",

they were much more likely to cooperate.

If they were in the "Wall Street game",

whether they were generous,benevolent,

or cut-throat,competitive,

they were much more likely to be cut-throat and competitive.

In other words,how we frame a situation-

community,Wall Street- can make all the difference.

Threat,opportunity- maybe the exact same thing.

How we frame it can make all the difference.

This is a study done by one...(part missing)...the quest.

A very important question which is

how can we raise the level of volunteerism,at Harvard and beyond

And the wonderful answer that she came up with is

let's get students as well as people in society at large to

reframe how we look at volunteering,

rather than as duty,something I have to do.

Why don't I look at it as a privilege?

I have the privilege of helping.And it is a real privilege.

Remember the study on kindness?

One of the best interventions for wellbeing.

It is a real privilege to give,to help.

And when people reframe this,

they are much more likely to volunteer.

This has implications for child rearing.

This has implications,of course,for education.

It has implications for society as a whole.

This is a topic I am going to talk about a lot.

I am going to dedicate much time when we discuss relationships.

But just very briefly,this understanding for me transformed,

literally transformed my relationship with my wife.

It transformed...

It is transforming my relationship with my friends,

as well as students and colleagues.

You see,we go into a relationship.

Most people think that important thing about relationship

is that we are validated,as we get pads on our back.

Now that's important in our relationship.

Surely important to be validated in any relationship,

whether it's with students/teacher,whether it's with friends,

certainly in romantic relationship.

However,what David Schnarch talks about is that primarily

if we want long-term,successful,thriving,

passionate relationships,the first objective,

the primary objective is to go into relationship to be known.

To be known,rather than to be validated,

meaning going in there and saying

"OK so how can my partner get to know me even better?"

Doing it gradually of course.

On the first date,you don't want to reveal all your secrets.

Doing it gradually.

You know,thinking about it,but opening up more and more.

And couples who over time open up more and more are able to

sustain the relationship as well as their passion,over time.

And again,I am going to talk about much more...

I am going to devote two classes at least to relationships.

This is going to be

one of the central pillars of successful long-term relationships.

Also with the students,the same applies.

You know when I initially started to teach,

I really wanted the validation from the students.

So how can I have my students perceive me as a good teacher?

I want them to like me.

And you know,that's important for everyone.

We all like to be liked.

However,when I switched my focus- and yeah,

I still want to be liked-

but my main focus is I want my students to know me.

I want them to know the topic

that I'm most passionate about in the world.

That really changed a lot.It's no longer to be validated,i.e.

to appear perfect,but it was to be known as a human being,

of course- permission to be human.

And that actually improved my teaching a great deal

and I enjoyed it so much more.

Because there is so much less pressure on us in a relationship,

any relationship,when we go in with the intention of being known

of expressing rather than impressing.

We can feel so much lighter.And the wonderful thing is,

that it also makes the relationship so much healthier.

But again,much more on it- because it is so important.

So important topic.We talked about this a lot.

How do we perceive failure,as a stumbling block?

A catastrophe? Or as an opportunity? As a growth experience?

And that can make all the difference.

We'll talk about it after spring break

when we discuss perfectionism and the fear of failure.

And finally,

the study that you read by Ali Crum and Ellen Langer.

So just give you a little bit background about the study

and I will briefly mention it,hopefully you've read it already.

Ali Crum was my student for,since her freshman year.

I was her TF when I taught with Phil Stone.

And then I was her thesis advisor with Ellen Langer.

And this was the topic of her thesis.

When Ellen Langer came up with the idea for the thesis,

and she told Ali and me

"this is what I think would be a very interesting study",

I took Ellen aside after the study- after the meeting,

after Ali went away.

And I told her "Ellen I don't think it's fair.

I don't it's fair that Ali will do her thesis on it."

Because the thesis is a very tough experiment-

you'll hear about it if you haven't read about it in a minute.

"If we take a lot of time from her,

she's not going to get any results."

Now you can write your senior thesis with getting no result,

without getting a result,that's OK.

But I said,"why waste her time,her senior year?"

And she said to me,"will work." I said to her,"no it won't."

And boy,did it work!

Now I've learned since not to argue with Ellen Langer

because she has ideas that you would never think would work,

but they do like the study we mentioned with the 1979

"I'm going back to 1959" or with the eye test,

being simply in the flying simulator improves your eyesight.

Again,ideas that seem fantastic,but she proves them right.

So the same happened here with this study.

The study was Ali went to hotels

and worked with the ladies who were cleaning the hotels.

And she went to them to two groups

and told both groups the importance of physical exercise.

And she said,

"this is,you know,something brought to you by your hotel,

just to show you how important exercise is."

And then she tested them on all these physical measures,

whether it was body fat,blood sample-

how much fat they had in their blood,weight,

psychological measures- depression,anxiety,and so on and so on.

And what she did was...

to the one group,she just left them after all these tests.

The second group,

she said to them,and this was the intervention,

"you know the work you are doing is actually physical exercise."

And she calculated how much calories it takes to pick up sheets,

to go like this and then to put it on a bed,

how much calories it takes to actually vacuum.

She estimated all those things

and then she gave them the statistics of how many calories

you should expend a day doing exercise.

And she says,"what you are doing is working out actually."

This was the intervention.And she went back 8 weeks later.

8 weeks later,she ran the exact same tests again.

And some of the results that she found-

some of them are in the article,others are not.

Blood pressure decreased significantly.

The fat in the blood decreased significantly.

Body weight,after the 8 weeks,

for the intervention group,not for the control group.

Control group: no change over that period!

Body weight decreased significantly.

Their self-esteem went up.Depression levels went down.

Anxiety levels went down.And energy levels went up.

All,as a result.

Now,she asked,"did you do anything differently?

Or you are exercising more than you did before?"

No difference between the control group

and the intervention group.

The only difference was perception.

Now they may have worked harder.We don't know.

It may be just the mind over body.We don't know.

But the fact is because they reframed,

they reconstructed their experience from a chore-

"I have to,you know,clean 30 rooms a day"

to "this is an exercise; this is good for me".

That made all the difference.

Physically as well as psychologically.

Here is an example of acute change.

This is the change that happens like a sledgehammer.

And this is the Eureka experience.

There's a lot of talk,a lot of research,

a lot of interest in this area of the Eureka experience,

the ah ha moment,the insight- so valuable,so important.

And there's much misunderstanding about it.

Because people think we suddenly have this insight,not so.

There's a whole process involved.

And the process begins with immersion.

This is when we prepare for the insight.This is when we learn.

Howard Gardner has done a lot of work

on extraordinary individuals throughout the world.

And what he found is that generally for people

to become the experts in a field,

to become Creative in a field,

they have to have invested at least ten years of very hard work.

This is the preparation.

This is when you immerse yourself in the material.

Look for the example of Beethoven.

Those of you who listen to his music and know his trajectory:

Symphony 1 and 2- Mozart.Sounds very similar to Mozart.

3rd Symphony,Eroica- it's Beethoven.

He immersed himself a great deal in the music of the day-

studied it and learned it.and then,after many years,

was able to become Beethoven and creative,

and transformed the whole field of music.

Being the first of the Romantics.

Second stage,

after we prepare- and it takes,again,a lot of hard work,

whether it's preparation that was done by Bill Gates

when he was skipping class or whether it's Bill Clinton.

A lot of preparation before you become an expert in the field

and are able to introduce Creativity-

have that eureka,the insight.

Second stage: incubation.

And you see all the creative individuals:

after you immerse yourself in an area,you do nothing.

You just allow it to marinate.

For example,there's no coincidence that

we get some of our best ideas in a shower.

It's no coincidence that Archimedes got his best idea in the bath

Mozart used to spend hours a day,just driving around Salzburg

and then suddenly he would have the ah ha experience,the eureka.

He said,"I could hear the symphony in a second."

In a second,he could hear just about everything.

OK.So that's Mozart.

But you hear Shakespeare would spend hours driving around

in his carriage and suddenly would have the insight,

"OK,this is what the story is about."

And then he would go and write it.Incubation is so so important.

J.P.Morgan:

"I can do a year's work in nine months,but not in twelve."

J.P.Morgan understood,you know,

arguably be the greatest entrepreneur this country has ever seen,

understood the importance for creativity of taking time off.

Today,business people,leaders don't take enough time off.

Because we think it's a waste of time.

We think that if we just sit there and do nothing,

we are really doing nothing.

Well,no.The mind works.

The mind works and the mind needs it for the creative insight.

In fact,leaders-

and many of you will go into leadership positions-

need time off more than anyone else.

Because they need to be creative.

They need to think about the next thing for the company,

for the organization.

Taking time in- invaluable.

Not just for memory,also for creativity.

One of the things I do when I work with,

as a consultant in organizations is

I just take the management on a retreat with no agenda.

We are just going to hang out.And very often,

within as little as half an hour or an hour,ideas begin to come out.

Why? Because as the first time,they have time,no coincidence

that we often wake up with a solution to a problem we had.

Because subconscious mind is making connections then.

Joseph Campbell:

"You must have a room,or a certain hour or so a day,

when you don't know what was in the newspapers that morning,

you don't know who your friends are,

you don't know what you owe anybody,

you don't know what anybody owes you.

This is a place where you can simply experience

and bring forth what you are and what you might be.

This is the place of creative incubation.

At first,you may find that nothing happens there.

But if you have such a sacred place and use it,

something eventually will happen." And very often,

it's during this incubation times,it's during these time-ins,

during the time when you have the opportunity to reflect,

whether it's on the response paper,

or just hang out and listen to music.

That's very often when the ah ha moment comes.

The eureka experience.The one second "I see the symphony".

You know,in some way,

you can think about an analogy of how this happens.

You can think about stage one.

Or you can think about in a context of a sexual intercourse.

Of making love.

Preparation and incubation can be the equivalent to foreplay.

The eureka experience- the orgasm.

Now the important thing to understand about this process

is you have to go through preparation,

incubation to get to the eureka experience.

In other words,you need the foreplay.

Did you hear that man?

You need the foreplay to get to the next level.

It's important.It's part of the creative process.

It's significant.It's very significant for love.

It's significant also for this process.

And then afterwards,

after you've come up with the eureka,that's when you evaluate.

You ask yourself,"is this a good idea? Does it work?

Or is it just something that you know women and..."

Most ideas,most eureka experiences actually end up not working.

And therefore,evaluation is important.

Is this really a good piece?

Is this really a good idea for a story?- Shakespeare asked.

Is this really a good idea for a philosophical treatise?- Descartes

who spent a lot of time on his own reflecting.

Is this a really good idea for a philosophical treatise?

Is this a good business plan? Is this the next Facebook?

Or is this just something that I had,you know,

the idea that I had at 3 in the morning

and someone has already done it or it won't work?

Evaluation is important.

There are many idea out there- not all of them work.

Or to go back to our analogy of making love.

So you have the first stage- the foreplay.

You have the orgasm and afterwards,

here's the question that you may be asking when you evaluate it.

The students,do you recognize them? The Shirelles.

The Shirelles.Actually my favorite group.Really.

My daughter's name,some of you know,is Shirelle.

And we were looking for a name that

would make sense in Hebrew as well as in English.

And my wife came up with the name Shirelle,

which means in Hebrew "song of God"

and you have the The Shirelles.

So it was just,when we found out,

that was just the perfect name.

You know what I love so much about it?

You can see the navy tame the dance.

I love that era! Just love it! Just love it.

Anyway,go in YouTube and sign and do the Shirelles,

you'll see other songs by them.So this is when you evaluate.

We are almost done.This is when you evaluate it.

Is this something that will last?

Is this something that is real?

A really good idea? A really good relationship? For example.

After that,

and this doesn't have a parallel to love-making- You elaborate.

You elaborate on the ideas.

So you write out,you write out the symphony.

This is when you write out the treatise.

This is when you make the business plan.

When I put together this course,I went through this process.

so I started off by preparing.

So even though I had very good preparation before,

you know I studied for the generals twice,

teaching with Professor Philip Stone as...

I was his TA,twice.TF.

Even though I studied social psychology for many years and...

I took time off,

where I immersed myself in positive psychology material.

I read the handbook of positive psychology

which is a very good weapon to use.

If anyone comes close,you can just throw at them.

It's about this big.But very good.

I read hundreds of academic journal articles.

And then I took time off.

And during that time off,I talked about positive psychology,

but I didn't work in positive psychology.

I had conversation with my wife,with Phil Stone,

with my brother about this.

And that's when the eurekas came.That's when the insights came.

I said,"OK so this is how the course is going to be built.

This is the spiral." Then I had the idea of PPEO,

Post Peak Experience Order,as an idea,an ah ha moment.

And afterwards,I evaluated it.I evaluated myself.

I evaluated by talking to other people about it to see

if it works and then I sat down

and spent hours and hours and hours,writing out the lectures.

All my lectures are written out.Obviously I don't read them.

But in preparation,

when I prepare for the lectures,I do read them a few times.

That was the elaboration.

That is the creative process,

whether it's putting together a class,

or putting together a great organization,

of writing a great book or creating a great relationship.

I'll see you next week.Have a wonderful weekend.

