Student:Hi.Good morning.My name is Dana.I'm a freshman.

Um,I'd like to tell you about

a social program happening here at Harvard next week.

My grandfather,who's Holocaust survivor,

is coming to give an account of his experiences.

I think it'll be a really special opportunity

to hear a moving account,a personal account of history.

He has spoken at other universities,at the UN.

His story is quite incredible.

The event will take place at 730 in the Memorial Church,

a week from today - Tuesday,March 18.

For more information,you can find on the Facebook event.

It's called "Surviving Auschwitz: A Holocaust survivor story".

You could just Google...

You could just check Holocaust under the Harvard network.

And it'll be great if you could come.

So any questions,please find me.My name is Dana.

I always send you the message.I was the creator of the event.

Thank you.Thank you,Tal.(Applause)

Dr.Tal Ben-Shahar:Hi.Good morning.So today

what we are going to do is finish up the lecture on change,

sum it up the ABCs- the affect,the behavior,the cognition,

and then move on to a related topic which is setting goals,

which will be the last topic

that I'll address before we go on break.The...

Last time I ended up by talking about the acute change

that comes with a Eureka experience,

with an ah hah,with an insight.

And we talked about these five stages.

And a couple of you contacted me after about this and said,

"well,it's not that smooth" and it's absolutely right.

This is a theory.This is an outline.

When you write,when you come up with ideas,

when you generate course,

when you write a paper or write a thesis-

some of you are thesis writers,

what you do is very often mix them.

So you have preparation.Then you write a little bit.

And then you take a break.You have an insight.

Then you go back to more preparation and on and on.

This is just a general outline,which is useful in a few ways.

First of all,

it is useful in that we can understand by looking at it.

There's no quick fix.

None of the great creative artists,scientists,

business people in history,created in a vacuum.

Initially they became experts in their fields.

They worked hard.They immersed themselves in the material.

So that's the first important element to remember.

No short cuts.We have to apply ourselves.

Remember the secret of success?

It's not just think,imagine,believe.

It also has to have the component of hard work as well as passion

So all the successful people...

Again,the best self-help books are biographies,

good biographies that show you the process,

not the "five easy steps".

The second important thing beyond the importance of immersion

of the preparation is the significance of taking time off.

One of the first thing that leaders of today,

one of the things they don't have today is time.

It's the thing that they need most.

Time off to incubate,to reflect,to metaphorically,

or literally,sit in the bath and think.

That incubation,the idle time stage.

Remember J.P.Morgan's quote:

"I can do a year’s work in nine months,but not in twelve."

And that's when the Eureka comes.That's when the good ideas come.

It's actually after a good night's sleep.

It's after "we do nothing for a while".

It's when we in the shower.

The next important thing,

component of this model is the evaluation part.

You know,there are many good ideas,

but very few ideas come to fruition

and actually become a good idea for a business,

or a good idea for a scientific paper,or a book,

or whatever it may be.

That's when the evaluation comes

and that's when the elaboration comes.

And these are no less important parts of the creative process.

It really is about 1 percent inspiration

and 99 percent perspiration.No short cuts.

So to summarize: the ABCs- the affect (the emotion),

the behavior (action),and the cognition (the thought).

I want to talk about a technique,

a simple technique- journaling that has remarkable,

remarkable consequence.

Just get a show of hands: how many people keep a journal

or have kept a journal for significant amount of time? OK.

That's great.That's great to see.

We know from,from this course and research

you encountered before how difficult change is.

Sometimes programs that have been around for 5 years don't help.

Very often interventions were millions and billions.

It's about-100-billion-dollars-a year industry

that change industries and organizations.

Most of the interventions don't work.

We know how difficult it is to change.

And yet journaling?

Very solid research showing how much it helps.

So let me share with you a study.

This was done by the person

who really brought journaling into the scientific realm.

So there'd been people like Ira Progoff and others

who had been talking about journaling for a very long time,

but it was Jamie Pennebaker from University of Texas,Austin,

who brought this idea to the scientific realm

and really researched it.And here is what he did.

What he did was bringing participants and have them do

the following: on 4 consecutive days that they came in,each day,

they would spend 15 minutes- that's all,15 minutes,

times for writing about the most difficult experiences.

Now they knew that no one would see it.

Or if they would see it,

it would be without a name- completely confidential.

So they were really able to treat it as their own journal.

And here was the instructions that these participants got.

It's a little long but worth,I think,worth reading.

"Write continuously about the most upsetting

or traumatic experience of your entire life.

Don't worry about grammar,spelling,or sentence structure.

In your writing,I want you to discuss

your deepest thoughts and feelings about the experience.

You can write about anything you want.

But whatever you choose,

it should be something that has affected you very deeply.

Ideally,it should be about something

you have not talked about with others in detail.

It is critical,however,that you let yourself go

and touch those deepest emotions and thoughts that you have.

In other words,

write about what happened and how you felt about it,

and how you feel about it now.

Finally,you can write on different traumas during each session

or the same one over the entire study.

Your choice of trauma for each session is entirely up to you."

Simple instructions.Pretty straight-forward.

If you notice,you see the ABCs in it.

So it says "write about what happened",

which is the behavior essentially.

Write about your deepest feelings- your affect,your emotions.

And write about your thought and analyze it.

The ABCs in journaling.

So when he did this study,initially the results came in- because

one of the first things he looked at was the anxiety level,

so when the results came in,disappointment.

In fact,thinking of stopping the study,

because this is what he found.

So if we have this graph,this would be anxiety level.

This would be time.

He had a control group and the control group just wrote

about anything that they wanted to write about.

Show no change over time.

So they started here,and they essentially,straight line.

The intervention group,the experimental group,

after 4 days of writing about their most traumatic,

most difficult experiences.

They started at the same point.They were randomly divided.

And then a rise in their anxiety.

After each of the days and during the 4 days-

rise in their levels of anxiety.

At this point,

he was thinking terminating the study- very disappointed.

Because he got from personal experience-

he knew that journaling helps him and

knew other people who talk about it,who swear by journaling.

But then,once the 4 days are over,during the fifth,

especially starting 6th,7th and on days,

this is what starts to happen.

Their anxiety levels went down.

Learning that they reach the same level as before,

they continue to go down.

And the most important thing is that

they stabilized below the previous level.

They stabilized below the previous levels of anxiety,

when he followed these participants

over a longer period of time up to a year.

4 times,15 minutes- that's total of an hour.

That's very little.And long lasting results.

Think about it: this is also what we saw before.

Sometimes,brief interventions are extremely effective.

Think about the shyness study that I spoke about last week

after 12 sessions of 12 minutes with women

who were interested in them,

these shy heterosexual men change radically.

So change can come in a relatively brief period of time

if we know how to intervene.

And journaling is one of these interventions.

Now this is not going to be one of your response paper-

it's too personal.

I don't think it's appropriate to assign it,

but I certainly do recommend that you do it.

Follow specifically Pennebaker's instructions.

Doesn't take that long.

Do it on 4 days,15 minutes,20 minutes each time,

just write whatever comes to mind.

So it was reducing anxiety over time.

Other results of the study-

and if you want to read much more about it,

he has a wonderful book called "Opening Up".

"Opening Up",by Jamie Pennebaker.

They became healthier.

So over the year of the study,they visited the doctor's office,

compared to a control group,far less.

In other words,it strengthened their immune system,

not just their psychological immune system,

their physiological immune system.

Generally they were in a better mood.

They were happier,more jovial,more benefit finders,

after writing about their deepest traumas.

They became more outgoing,less repressed,less suppressed.

Now why is that? We talked about it often that positive emotions

and painful emotions flow through the same pipeline.

And if we suppress something,if we stop something,

which is painful,we are very often indirectly,

inadvertently also suppressing the positive emotions,

whereas here they open up,quite literally open up

and allow these emotions to flow through them.

They are essentially opening up a clogged channel-

a clogged channel through which emotions,

painful as well as positive emotions normally flow.

And they experience higher levels of happiness.

They are more open,more generous,

as we saw also when you do the gratitude exercise.

Very similar results.

There were gender differences,which is interesting.

Now both sexes benefited from it.

However,men benefited more than women.

Think about it.

Why do you think that is? It makes sense,if you think about it.

Women benefited significantly got better,

but men benefited even more.

Why? Because women have,generally speaking- again,

this is brush stroke stereotype-

but generally speaking,women open up more.

They speak more with their girl friends.

They have closer friends and they talk about issues.

Men still in our culture today are much more close

because it's not cool to open up.

It's not cool to give yourself the permission to be human,

especially when others are listening.

so women generally in their lives

But still,even women who have strong supports systems

still benefit from this exercise,

which reminds me of another result of a study

I mentioned months ago,the beginning of the course,

which said women generally,again these are all averages,

but in general,

women- or rather men benefit more from marriage than women.

For similar reason.

Because women already have the supports system in place.

Men,very often,for the first time they are with someone,

who they feel comfortably enough opening up to.Again,

both males and females benefit from a long-term relationship,

but men generally tend to benefit more than women.

For the same reason that he found gender difference here.

Across cultures.

This is done in China,in Japan,Mexico,Argentina,

United States of course,Europe- replicated across cultures.

In all cultures,people benefit from this study.

Here is another study,which took the exact opposite approach.

So Laura King was a student of Pennebaker,

took the exact opposite approach and said,

"let's study...(inaudible)...

to see what happens when the individuals

write about their most intensive positive experience.

What she did specifically was taking the instructions

from Abraham Maslow's work on peak experience.

And here are the instructions.

Once again,this was three times,15 minutes,

so 45 minutes total on three consecutive days.

"Think of the most wonderful experience

or experiences in your life,happiest moments,ecstatic moments,

moments of rapture,perhaps from being in love,

or from listening to music,or suddenly ‘being hit’

by a book or painting or from some great creative moment.

Choose one such experience or moment.

Try to imagine yourself at that moment,

including all the feelings and emotions

associated with the experience.

Now write about the experience in as much detail as possible

trying to include the feelings,thoughts,

and emotions that were present at the time.

Please try your best to re-experience the emotions involved."

Essentially the exact opposite of Pennebaker.

Results? Identical.

Those who wrote about their peak experiences,

their best experiences,visited the doctor's office less time-

in other words,it strengthened their physiological immune system

and experienced more happiness.

So both psychological and physiological results.

Now when you look at this,some of you may be thinking that

"well,what about the Lyubomirsky study?"

Remember the Lyubomirsky study?

That said when you write about positive emotions.

Actually you feel worse.

Whereas you write about negative emotions,

you do feel better as Pennebaker suggested.

Here's the difference.

The instructions that Laura King gave were mostly,

were mostly about describing and re-experiencing,

replaying your experience.

It wasn't about analyzing "why did it happen","how did it"...

It was rather how it happen- in other words,replaying it.

When the instructions-

and this is the Lyubomirsky study- were analyze the experience:

why it happened,how did you get there and so on and so on.

That's why it had the negative consequences over time,

but just replaying the experience,

just writing about how wonderful it is,

re-experiencing emotionally what that was-

that actually let you benefit.

Now the interesting question is why.

Why are there such remarkable benefits to journaling?

Let's understand the process,the mechanism.

So there are a few things that are at play here.

One of the things for example with positive emotions is that

when you are replaying it,you are simply,

you are fortifying the neural pathways.

You replay,you imagine it again

and you make it more likely to happen again.

Just like when you have a river,

remember the analogy from two weeks ago,you have a river,

and the more water go through it,then the wider it becomes,

and then the more water is likely to go into it.

That's self-reinforcing nature of change.

So the first thing,

the first reason why writing especially about painful emotions

but not just painful emotions,

the reason why it helps is because of tension.

We talked about ironic processing- Daniel Wegner's work from here

And what he talks about is that

when we suppress unnatural phenomenon,it often intensifies.

Be it thinking about a pink elephant

or be it suppressing painful emotions.

And when we give ourselves the permission to be human,

we are much more likely to release it,to let go,

which is why therapy helps,which is why sharing with friends,

opening up helps,which is why journaling helps.

This is the whole idea of suppression or repression.

The second thing that Pennebaker talks about is coherence.

One of the things that he finds is that

the individuals who benefit most,and he analyzes the test,

confidentially of course,but he analyzes the test.

Individuals who benefit most from the study

are once introduced a lot of insight words,or insight phrases,

meaning by the third day,they are all writing

"now I see that" or "I understand that"

or "it just dawned on me that" or "I realize that".

Those who have many of these words or phrases in their writings

are the ones who benefited the most.

In other words,

they've created a sense of coherence out of the experience.

They make sense out of something perhaps

before that was senseless.

In other words,they created a story around their experiences.

It's no longer dispersed,disjointed,disconnected data.

Now it is a coherent whole.It's a story.

Now I can deal with it.

And if you think about it,what do people mostly remember?

People mostly remember stories.

Why? Because you remember a story,

because it's one unit- it's a whole.

If I give you now a collection of,you know,100 random words,

it'll take you a very long time to commit to memory.

I mean we all know,we all took the SATs.

But if I tell you a story,

you are much more likely to remember it.

Maybe not word for word,but certainly,the general ideas.

Because we can hold it,we can grasp it.

Because it has a sense of coherence.

I can deal with it.I can handle it,

as opposed to some dispersed ideas,disjointed words.

The exact same here.

We want to feel that our lives have a sense of coherence

that we can make sense of them.

Pennebaker: "An artifact of our ambiguous and unpredictable world

is the anxiety of not attaining completion

and not understanding a simple cause-and-effect explanation

for traumatic disturbances.

Alas,we naturally search for meaning

and the completion of events; it gives us a sense of control

and predictability over our lives."

Again,that's why therapy helps,

because we create coherence out of experience.

This is why there was far less post-traumatic stress disorder

after the Holocaust after there was the Vietnam war.

Because after the Holocaust,they spoke about these experiences.

They created a story around it,a tragic one,

but still there was a sense of coherence,as opposed to Vietnam

where there was just random flashes of experiences

without giving themselves permission,or without society,

in many ways,giving them the permission to open up

and to create a story out of it that they could hand,

they could grasp.

The work of Pennebaker to a great extent relies on the work of

a psychologist who we mentioned on the very first day of class.

And that is Aaron Antonovsky.

Aaron Antonovsky

whom I consider to be one of the fathers of positive psychology,

if you remember,came up with the notion of "salutogenesis",

an alternative to the pathogenic model- pathogenic model,

the model that focuses on pathology,on sickness,on illness,

where what Antonovsky said is

we need to focus on the origins of health.

Saluto- health; genesis- origin.

And what he did specifically was the following.

So he was a sociologist and he said the following-

he said: look,life is tough.People go through hardship.

They go through difficulties- whether we like it or not,

we all in life encountered hardships.

In relationship,in school,at work- whatever,whichever domain,

there are hardships,there are difficulties.

Life is hard.Period.We know that.

However,there are some people

who are able to better deal with the hardship,

with the difficulties,who still,

despite- they don't do away these hardships-

despite these hardships and difficulties

are still able to lead a full,fulfilling and overall,happy life

Not the constant high-

that's reserved for psychopaths and dead people.

With the same ups and downs,but at a higher level of wellbeing,

or of a lower level of anxiety.

And he said we need to study those.

We shouldn't just study the sick people,

whether the sick people who are physically ill-

which is mostly the pathogenic model of medicine,

or the people who are unwell psychologically- schizophrenia,

depression,anxiety as psychology has mostly studied.

He said we need to look at the healthy people and study them,

which is exactly the model

that led to asking the question in 1980s with at-risk population:

"What makes some individuals succeed

despite unfavorable circumstances?"

It was his question that made all the difference.

So he did the same in his research

and asked about the general population:

"Who are the people who are healthy?

And what is the origin of that health?

What distinguishes them from other people?"

And he came up with the notion of the sense of coherence

that people have the sense of coherence about their lives.

What that means is that,

he said it has three components that he researched and identified

The first component:

sense of comprehensibility- I understand the world.

It makes sense to me.I see.I realize.I get it.

The world and event,difficulties and hardships,

highs and lows make sense to me mostly.

Second,sense of manageability.

I can deal with it.I can handle it.

I have the internal as well as external resources to deal with it

as opposed to being helpless.

This is a sense of efficacy,of confidence-

being able to deal with the hardships that arise.

So that's the second component.

The third and the final component

that makes up the sense of coherence,according to Antonovsky,

is a sense of meaningfulness.

This was not in vain- this difficulty.

This disagreement with my partner was not for nothing,

because we understand one another better now.

And we are even close,more intimate.

This failure was not in vain.

I have learned from it.And I have grown from it.

This mistake has reason- again,

not necessarily happen for the best,

but learning how to make the best of what happens.

These three components are what he identified and replicated

in later research as the source of mental health.

To quote Pennebaker- to quote Antonovsky,a sense of coherence:

"A global orientation that expresses the external-

the extent to which one has a pervasive,

enduring though dynamic feeling of confidence that

(1) the stimuli deriving from one's internal

and external environments in the course of living are structured,

predictable and explicable (comprehensible,in other words);

(2)	the resources are available to one to meet the demands posed

by these stimuli (internal resources and external resources:

I can deal with it,I can manage);

and (3) these demands are challenges,

worthy of investment and engagement (it's meaningful)."

Look at these three.

For all those who write a journal,

I bet you can identify these three in your writings.

This is what a journal does to a great extent.

When we write and when we really write about our experiences,

our difficult experiences,

this is very often what comes up - have sense of coherence.

I see.I understand.Make sense.

I can deal with it.I can handle it.

I have just found a path of how to do it.

Even if dealing with it and handling it is writing a journal,

and finally,it makes sense to me.

It's meaningful to me now,whereas before,it didn't as much.

So if you don't have a journal,you don't journal,

it is certainly something that I highly,highly recommend.

Let me summarize the whole change lecture: the A,B and C.

The three are interconnected.

In fact,if we want real change to come about,

they have to be interconnected.

Why? Because habit is like a flood.

And it's not enough if we just create a small nook

or cranny trying to create a new habit.

Because flood would wash it away.

What we need is the A,the B and the C.

Implement these changes in our lives.

And they are interconnected.So let me give you an example.

Let's say someone who has low self-esteem.

Low self-esteem,the C- cognition:

they don't think highly of themselves.

Poor self evaluation.

When you don't think highly of yourself,

you are more likely to be innervated,to feel down,

not to be motivated,and as a result of that,that is the Affect,

the emotion that you experience- not good feelings;

as a result of that,we are much more likely to do nothing-

in other words,the B is do nothing.

Now through self-perception theory,

the behavior then affects my cognition on doing nothing:

I'm not dealing.I'm not coping.I'm avoiding.

And that lowers my self esteem,

even more my evaluation of myself,the C.

And that leads to even worse emotions

and so on and so on and so on,in a downward spiral,

until in some cases,we reach resignation,

or in Martin Seligman's words,learned helplessness.

Now think of someone who has high self-esteem,

high level of self-confidence.

I believe in myself.I think I can do well.

That leads to high level of motivation.

Remember what Marva Collins does?

The model that we talked about under belief,

self-fulfilling prophecies-

that leads to high levels of motivations,strong emotions.

I'm energized.

And that in turn leads to more action- the B,the behaviors.

Because I act more,I do more,I cope more.

I put myself on the line more.

I'm much more likely to have more positive evaluation of myself,

which leads to more positive emotions and on and on and on,

in an upward spiral.

The spiral that Barbara Fredrickson talks about

in the Broaden-and-build,the spiral that Bandura talks about

when he discusses self-efficacy.

When we intervene,it's important to introduce,

if possible,all three.

And we can start anywhere.

So let's take an example- someone with socialphobia,

someone who is afraid to be out there,in front of people.

One way to deal with it-

let's begin with the A,the Affect,the emotion.

One way to deal with it is through medication

that goes directly to our emotions.

Another way of dealing with it is meditation,

which also affects our emotions directly.

Some people benefit more from one,or from the other-

depends on how extreme the situation is.

But that's the A,the Affect.

One way of dealing with it,behavior,

is through what's called in cognitive behavioral therapy,exposure

which is gradual exposure to stimuli that create that phobia.

So initially I'll walk,you know,10 yards out of my home.

Initially exposure through the imagination

and I include it under behavior,

because the mind does know the difference

between the imaginary and the real.

So gradually being exposed to it.

Over time being exposed more and more,

until I can go out to a mall

and not experience the same anxiety that I did a year ago.

So that's through behavior.

Very effective- the exposure technique.

And finally,you can also intervene through cognition in therapy,

in dealing with irrational thoughts,psychological traps,

the three M's- "Am I magnifying? The extent.

Am I minimizing something?

For example,my successes in working with people.

Or am I making up? Imaginary scenarios.

My catastrophizing events when I can have a more realistic view."

So that's my thinking about it,the cognition.

Let me show you a personal example of something that I dealt with

So as you know,born through genes- high levels of anxiety.

Very prone to it.

Startle very easily- still,less today,

but still to some extent today.

Used to get very nervous in squash matches.

Used to choke often,when I was playing important games.

And that's something that in front of,

speaking in front of an audience,got very nervous and anxious.

And this is something that I decided

that I really wanted to deal with.

More than any other things that I was facing.The thing anxiety.

So what did I do? Let me begin first with the C,Cognition.

What I did- I analyzed the situation in my journal.

I used the Bureau of Study Counsel.

I learned and studied about the three M's,

the irrational thoughts-

magnifying,minimizing,making up,catastrophizing.

And through cognition,it helped a lot.

That wasn't enough.

After the C,I went to the A,the Affect.

And the Affect was for me physical exercise.

You know,even today,this morning,at home,I ran.

I exercise because

it significantly lowers anyone's levels of anxiety.

And I can tell a significant difference in my talks

if I don't exercise.

So even three or four weeks ago,David,my son was unwell

and I had to take him to the doctor first thing Tuesday morning.

Didn't have time to exercise.Actually felt it in the lecture.

I was more nervous,more anxious.Makes a big difference.

As we'll talk about,after break,

it literally has the same effect as taking an anti-anxiety pill.

So exercise was certainly there,work directly on my emotion.

Yoga.Helped me tremendously

in dealing with anxiety and lowering that level.

So this was the emotional.

The other thing,music.Relaxing music.

You know my taste in music.I don't need to repeat it again.

So actually when Tammy and I got married,we moved in together.

She couldn't believe my collection of CDs.

She said "you don't look that anxious".

Because I had,um,

"The Most Relaxing Classical Music in the World",

"Music for Relaxation","Music for Dealing with Anxiety",

silent quiet music- I mean,a whole shelf of the relax...

But they relax me! They really help me.

And finally,behavior.Introducing behavior.

So it is through exposure.Initially giving a talk.

Because I want to be a teacher.

Giving a talk to my squash team.Giving a talk to my family.

Places that were safe for me.

Giving a talk to anyone who would listen.

Initially small groups and gradually building it up.

Exposure through the imagination.

Once again,

the imaginary thing and over time becoming more  confident.

Another thing that for me was very significant

as an undergrad here- speaking up in section.

I was terrified of speaking up.

And when I decided to do that,I had no doubt in my mind

that everyone in section could hear my heart beat.

Because it was in my head.

And yet,gradually,

I spoke up a little bit more and a little bit more,

and then through self-perception theory,

it actually got better and better and better.

And I still do all these things.

I still do yoga.I still do exercise regularly.

I still engage in the CBT approach,the 3 M's.

I keep a journal,which combines very often all three.

And I listen to relaxing music.And it works.It works.

Now change is not easy.It is hard.It takes time.However,

that doesn't mean that the process itself cannot be enjoyable.

It's not OK when I've changed then I'll be happy.

The process itself is extremely,potentially,extremely rewarding

Sometimes difficult.Potentially,very rewarding.

The journey as well as the destination.

The other important thing to remember about change-

this is taken from the work of,

really the person who took the psycho-analysis

and transformed it into a more positive approach- Karen Horney,

who I mentioned before.

What she says about neurosis

is that neurosis never go away completely.

And when she says neurosis,

she means it in the most,in the broadest sense.

So for example,if I am a perfectionist,

I'll always have some perfectionism in me.

And we'll talk about it after the break.

If I am prone to anxiety,I'll never be,you know,

the Dalai Lama,unlikely.It'll always be there.

And it'll always be potentially triggered by any event.

And she says "that's OK.That's natural.

That's human." And we need to accept it.

Because if we don't accept it,

then we'll be constantly frustrated.

Because we want to change completely,

or expect our partner to change completely.

Very difficult.Unrealistic.It takes time.It's gradual.

We need to also learn.And we can learn to enjoy the process.

Henry David Thoreau,1840s: "I know of no more encouraging fact

than the unquestionable ability of man

to elevate his life by a conscious endeavor.

It is something to be able to paint a particular picture,

or to carve a statue,and so to make a few objects beautiful;

but it is far more glorious to carve and paint

the very atmosphere and medium through which we look,

which morally we can do.

To affect the quality of the day,that is the highest of arts."

Again,it's the process; it's not the outcome that matters more.

The outcome will lead to a spike

but will very quickly to go back to our base level.

It's the process of actually doing those activities,

the As,the Bs,and the Cs that will lead to a happier-

not perfect,not happiest,but happier life.

Over time,it takes time to carve out live statue,

chipping away the excess stone,

the limitations and building a beautiful life.

It is not only the highest of art,

it is also- I would argue,a high science.

And that is the science of psychology.

I want to move on now.Move on and talk about...

One second.Here we go.

I want to talk about a topic that is related to,

very much related to the whole change,

to the whole change process.

And that is goal setting.

Now,question for you: how many people here-

put your hand up if this applies to you-

do you want to become more efficient and procrastinate less?

If it's true for you,put your hand up.

One,two,three,four,five,six...OK.

Put your hand up now

if you want to experience less stress and be calmer,

whether it's during an exam period or not.OK.

One,two...OK.

Now if you put your hand up for one of these questions,

you should stay.

If you put up your hand for both questions,

you should not only stay,you should stay awake.

Because what we are going to talk about of

the next two classes is the importance of goals

and how they can help us deal with stress,

how they can help us deal with procrastination,

how we can become more efficient- not perfectly so.

By the end of the two weeks,

you are not going to a well-oiled machine.

You are just going to be a happier human being-

just think is a lot.

So first of all,

the topic that we'll talk about under goal setting- first,

understand the theory and the practice of goal setting:

the Ivory tower and the Main Street of it;

second,how do we deal with stress-

we'll talk about this in the next class;

and finally,I don't think we have time for this,

but I'm still leaving up the powerpoints there just

so you can look at it,and I elaborate on it in the book.

Moving from material perception to happiness perception,

which is essentially about what I talked about

in the last meditation of the book,The Happiness Revolution

and the internal revolution that can take place.

I know you don't have time for before break,

but you still have the material on it.

So let's begin with theory and practice.

What I want to do now is convince you,very simply,

to set goals,convince you that it is important

and yet you are going to do it for,your response papers.

You have already started doing it,

but I really want to convince you,as a way of life,

setting goals regularly,

whether it's in business,whether in your personal life.

First,I'm going to do it by convince,

showing you the research on setting goals

and performance and second,setting goals and happiness-

how it contribute to our success in the conventional  
currency,

as well as in the ultimate currency.

Quite simply,people who set goals are generally,

controlling for other things,more successful.

Why?

One of the main reasons is because what goals do is they  
focus us

Very often,

we are all over the place; we are not sure where we are  
going.

And if we don't know where we are going,

we are unlikely to get there.And the focus gets us directed.

It brings forth resources-

external and internal resources- that are necessary to get  
there.

Abraham Maslow: "Being focused on a task produces  
organization

for efficiency both within the organism and in the  
environment."

Quite remarkable how goals actually work.

When we set goals,when we enter something,

whether it's privately but eve better- publicly,

things begin to happen inside us as well as around us.

Also,goals contribute to performance and well-being

because they strengthen our resilience.

Remember the second class when we talked about resilience?

One of the things that extinguish those kids who were  
successful,

despite difficult external circumstances,

was the fact that they were resilient,

and one of the distinguishing characteristics

was they set goals for themselves.

They were future-oriented.

Not only thinking about the past,being "learned helpless"-

learning to be helpless,but focusing on the future.

Nietzsche once wrote that if we have a what for,

every how becomes possible.

When we have the what for,every how becomes possible.And

we are much more likely to overcome difficulties and hardships,

if we have a goal,a mission,something that we care about,

something that we want to attain.

Goals make us more successful

for the exact same reason that positive beliefs do.

What we are doing with goals with declaring

that we believe we are going to get something.

Roger Bannister declared,

said that he would break the 4 minute barrier.

Thomas Edison said that by the 31 of December,1879,

he would generate light from electricity.

Setting goals makes it more likely to come true.

Because our mind does not like when the reason inconsistency

between what is inside and what is outside.

It wants there to be match.

And if I believe in a goal and I declare a goal,

the outside is likely to match that.

Again,not 100 percent correlation as we've discussed,

but certainly making it much more likely to happen,

making us much more likely to be successful.

Now what is the knapsack?

Imagine the following: you go on a road trip.

And you have a knapsack on your back.

And you reach a wall,a barrier.

What do you do? Well,

there are many things that you can do when you reach that  
wall.

And the wall is long and high.

One way is to say,"OK,pity" and turn around.

In other words,avoid that wall.

Another thing we can do is take out our sledgehammer

and try to break it down.

Another thing that we can do before we do any of the other  
things

is take our knapsack and throw it over the wall.

Take our knapsack and simply throw it over the wall.

Why? Because the necessity is the mother of inventions.

I need my knapsack to continue.I need my knapsack.

I want it.And now it's over the wall.I have no choice.

But to get over that wall,whether it's by breaking it down,

whether it's by finding a way around it,under it or over it.

But suddenly,I will come up with solutions

that I have not seen before and this is how it works.

It's remarkable- how it works- for the exact same reason

that when you declare a goal such as "I want to buy a computer".

Suddenly you see computer ads all around you,

whereas before you didn't see computer ads.

or let's say you want to buy specific car.

Suddenly you see that specific car all around you

while you didn't see it before.

Why? Because we co-create our reality

through our questions to a great extent.

Remember the children on the bus were there all along,

but you didn't see them until I presented a goal to you

which was to count the number of children on the bus

And then suddenly it was so clear

that it was right in front your eyes.

Before,they didn't exist for you.That's what a goal does.

If I declare that I have to get over the wall,

and my question is "how do I get over this wall".

It's not thinking about "is it possible or is it not  
possible".

It's rather "how can I get over this wall".

This question opens up opportunities,

many of which I have not seen before.

Suddenly the children on the bus are right in front of me.

Suddenly a hole in the wall is right in front of me.

Suddenly I see a sledgehammer that I didn't see before,

right next to me.

Necessity is the mother of inventions.

If we ask the right questions,it opens up opportunities.

The other thing that's at work here is the power of the  
word:

words create worlds.Let there be light.

We've seen it in religion.And there was light.

Words create the world.

Book of John: in the beginning was the word.

But it's not just in religion.Look at this great country.

The United States was declared into existence.Words have  
power.

They have meaning,especially when the words are meaningful  
to us

when the goals that we declare are meaningful to us,

they are much more likely to come true.

The connection between concept and conceive

is not just etymological,it is also metaphysical.

It is also real.

Because when we declare something,when we save something,

it is much more likely to become a reality.

What words do is essentially create an image in our minds,

especially when we imagine the goal.

It creates an image in our mind and the mind doesn't know

the difference between the imaginary and the real.

And the mind wants consistency- that is what goals do.

They help us create consistency.

I want to read you an excerpt that,

I talk about many of these things in the book so for some of  
you,

this may be a repetition.

But I want to read you an excerpt from W.H.Murray,

who led the Scottish expedition to the Himalayas,

one of those prominent,accomplished climbers of all time,

climbed the Everest.

Here's what he says,

in his writing about the expeditions that he took:

"Concerning all acts of creation there is one elementary truth,

the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans:

That the moment one definitely commits oneself,

then providence moves too.

All sorts of things occur to help one

that would not have otherwise occurred.

A whole stream of events issues from the decision,

raising in one's favor all manner of unforeseen incidents

and meetings and material assistance

which no man would have dreamed would come his way.

I have learned a deep respect for one of Goethe's couplets:

'Whatever you can do,or dream you can,begin it!'

Boldness has genius,magic,and power in it."

Why it works,how it works- we are not really sure,but it works.

Just like when you declare you are looking for computer,

suddenly you see all these opportunities,

the same with commitments.

When we commit,things begin to happen.

We begin to identify external resources

as well as internal resources.

Things that we didn't see before.

Because my question becomes "how can I succeed".

And then children on the bus

or the time on the clock suddenly become visible to us.

And we are able to succeed...

Much more likely to succeed than before.Words create worlds.

So this is about success.Very well documented.

Some of your readings are related to this.

People who set goals generally,controlling from other factors,

are more successful,whether it's in business,

whether it's in other personal lives.Goals matter.

They don't just matter though for the "hard currency".

They also matter for the "ultimate currency"-

the currency of happiness.

Goals properly understood,

goals properly understood,lead to happiness.

And I emphasize "properly understood".

Why? Because we know that attaining goals,

the attainment of goals does not in

and of itself lead to happiness.

Yes,getting tenure will lead to a spike of my well being,

but very quickly I'll go back to my base level.

Winning a lottery or making a lot of money,or getting a,

or getting promoted at work will lead to a spike in my well being

but it will not lead to long lasting happiness.

So that's temporary- we know that.

So we know that attainment of goals does not lead to happiness.

What does lead to happiness?

Understanding the proper role of goals.

And understanding that

it's not the attaining of a goal that leads to happiness,

but the having of a goal that leads to happiness.

So two years ago,when I taught positive psychology,

a book came out by very important scholar

in the area of happiness,who's the Dalai Lama's right hand man.

He's translator,Ricardo Matthieu.

Wonderful book on happiness came out.

And we,in Williams James Hall 1,engaged in a debate-

was an event for Harvard students and faculty.

And we engaged in a debate- "Happiness: East and West".

And we agreed on many things-

as you know,I meditate regularly,

and certainly believe

in the power of a lot of the Buddhist psychology.

However,the one thing that we disagreed on was goals.

That's the one thing we disagree.

Because in Buddhism,according to many of the  
interpretations-

not all,many of the interpretations,

the state we want to reach is a state of non-attachment.

A state where we will not have something external that we want,

that we desire,

that we will be completely present in the here and now.

Now I think it's a wonderful ideal perhaps,

but what I argued and what I still argue is that it's unrealistic

As human beings,I do not believe-

maybe after 30 years of meditating for 8 hours a day, possible-

but I do not believe that we can reach a state

where we are not attached.

And setting goals is an example of attachment.Because

when I say I want to win this championship or I want to get an A-

in this course or I want to get a job in this bank,

this is a goal which means by definition

that I'm attached to the outcome.

If I wasn't attached,if I didn't care then,it wouldn't matter.

And I think it's not only important for success,

it is also important for happiness.

So that's where I differ to a great extent

from some of the Buddhist interpretations

on non-attachment of being in a desire-less state.

However,where we are similar in our understanding

is the focus on the present.

Goals properly understood their role

is to liberate us to enjoy the present.

What does this mean? Let's say you go off on a road trip.

And you have no idea where you are going.

You don't have a goal.You don't have a destination in mind.

You are less likely rather than more likely,

less likely to enjoy the journey.

Because every minute you'll look left or right or ahead

to see if you are not falling over the stage;

whereas if you know where you are going,

you have a sense of direction.

You are liberated.

You are much more likely to enjoy the process,

the flower on the side as well.

Think about your lives- periods that you have no idea,

or for many of you,I know,it's happening right now.

You have no idea where you are going next year.

Now for a while,for most people,it's OK.It's fine.

But after a while,you want to know where you are going.

Because when you are immersed in something,

you have a clearer sense of direction.

You are much more likely to be happy,

which explains why so many people,when they retire,

become less happy,

even though they've been dreaming of being retired for many years

When they actually retire,they become less happy.

The ones who are happier when they retire are the ones

who actually set goals for themselves,

whether it's taking a class,whether it's learning something new,

whether it's spending more time with family and friends,

but they have a goal,

as opposed to "let's just enjoy ourselves; let's just be".

We need that goal- this outcome,this future orientation,

so that we can enjoy the present more.

The goals liberate us to enjoy the here and now.

In other words,

if you think about it,the role of goals is actually means.

They are means toward an end,

and the end are the present experiences.

Again,the goals in themselves,

as we said,as we discussed,will not make us happier,

whether attaining of the goal or failing to attain the goal.

We'll be on the ups and downs,the vicissitudes.

But if we want the base level- the base level is the here and now

The present.It's the process.

It's the journey that we're living mostly,not the outcome.

When I start the book,

I talk about thinking this rally championship would make me  
happy

And it did.For 4 hours.And then back again to base level.

Professors who get tenures think that is

what would make them happy for the rest of their lives-

the attainment of that goal.

It doesn't.

They go back to base level of happiness,

whether they get it,or don't get it.

The key is to learn,to enjoy the process.

And one of the roles of the goals is to liberate us

so that we can enjoy the process.

Goals are means toward the present end,

which is taking a lot of goal theory and turning it around.

This explains why so many high achievers are unhappy.

This explains why so many high achievers

turn to drugs and to alcohol.

By the way,today even more so than in the past-

maybe today we know about it more than in the past.

Going into rehab centers constantly.

Coming out and going back.

And we ask ourselves,"why? How could it be?"

Those people who seemingly have it all.

Who seemingly have it all.

Fame.Fortune.Beauty.Anyone they want.

The life that most people in the world dream about.

How come they end up in a rehab center?

How come they are unhappy? Here's the how come.

You see,for years,when they climb up the ranks,

when they have the dream of becoming a famous person,

a person who is admired,revered,

a person who can get anything or anyone almost they want,

when they dream about it,they may be unhappy.

But they say to themselves,

"OK.I'm unhappy now,but I'll be happy when I get there."

And then they get there.

And they realize that there's no "there" there.

They think it would make them happy,but it doesn't.

And that's when the real problems begin.

Because that's when they begin to experience helplessness.

That's when they become resigned.

That's when they go into- on the Hamburger model,

that's when they go into the learned helplessness

and resignation and the nihilism.

Because everyone has told them

that once they make it then they'll be happy.

And they told themselves,"once I make it then I'll be happy".

And they are not any happier for it.

Yeah,initially when the fame begins,

and when they start having things in their way

as they always dream,of course they are happier.

But then they go back to their base level.

And when they go to their base level,they are suppressed,

they are upset,they are disappointed,

and more than anything,they are scared.

Because what now? Until that point,

they were sustained by their hope that when they get there,

they'll be happy,but they are not happier.

And they are scared.And they are lost.

And they look for solutions,

very often outside of the normal experiences,

outside of ordinary life.

And where is that? That very often is with drugs and with alcohol

Because that takes us out of our normal day-to-day,

ordinary lives.For good and ill.

This misunderstanding prevalent and most people live that way.

And they think- and this is why

so many people go through mid-life crisis for example.

It's not the only reason.But it's one of the reasons.

Because there are many people who are pretty accomplished,

who have nailed it,and then they say,

"what now? Is this all the raise to it?"

Yes,this is all the raise to it.And the challenge

is to identify the treasure of happiness that are embedded,

that are there in the it and that are there all around us.

Again,happiness is not contingent on our status

or the state of our bank account.

It's contingent on our state of mind,

of how we interpret our reality,of on what we choose to focus on

And to be happier is the present that matters much more.

Quote from my book:

"Happiness is not about making it to the peak of the mountain,

nor is it about climbing aimlessly around the mountain;

happiness is the experience of climbing toward the peak."

It is about having a goal.

It is about having a destination in mind,

and then letting go and enjoying the process.

You know there are many people who talk to me about it,

and again I went through the exact same experience.

So OK "what is going to be the next job that I take?"

"What is going to be the path that I take?"

And once they take a path,it is very often they regret,

"I should've taken the other path." Should've taken this job.

Should've gone there.And my response to it is it doesn't matter.

It doesn't,in the ultimate currency,it doesn't matter.

Because,yeah,let's say I am at a job that I should have taken

and I would be very successful there.Fine.

I would enjoy a high when I became very successful.

But that in and of itself would not make me happy.

The key is to have the goal.

The key is to have the commitment

to whatever it is that I'm doing.

Now that commitment may change every three days and that's OK.

It's the having the goals,having that commitment that Nmatters.

So if you chose certain path and now you regret it,

remember,it really doesn't matter.

You can be as happy in both paths as long as you are committed.

Because when we are committed,

that's when we can enjoy the journey.

Doesn't matter as much what it is that we are committed to,

provided of course that is moral

and it's not about hurting others,

which ultimately doesn't just hurt others-

it also hurts ourselves.

David Watson in "The Handbook of Positive Psychology":

"Contemporary researchers emphasize

that it is the process of striving after goals—

rather than goal attainment per se—

that is crucial for happiness and positive affectivity."

And finally,two of the leading researchers in the field,

David Myers and Ed Diener: "Happiness grows less

from the passive experience of desirable circumstances

than from involvement in valued activities

and progress toward one goal."

Here is a beautiful poem

that I think captures by Gwendolyn Brooks:

"Live not for battles won / Live not for the-end-of-the-song

/ Live for the along." It's not any goals that matter.

It's not any goals that...Not all goals are created equal.

And here's what we do get to a place

where it's important to think about your goals.

Yes,the commitment is the most important,

but there are certain goals that are better than others:

self-concordant goals,very briefly,

because -it's in your readings- are essentially goals that

are aligned with your personal interests and values-

things that you care about.

Doing things that are important to you.

So for example,doing premed because

what you really really want to be is a doctor and treat people.

Studying economics because the market fascinates you.

And you want to engage in work that relates to it.

You are passionate about it.

Joining a student organization,

because you believe in their mission.

Aligned with your personal interests,

with your values,with your passion.

These are goals that you choose freely,

not goals that are imposed from the outside

whether it's by someone specific or specific people,

or by abstract society.

And doing it out of a sense of obligation or duty.

It's to do things that you care about deeply from within.

In other words,these are things that you want to do,

or that you feel,that you perceive that you want to do,

rather than things that you have to do.

My teacher Ohad Kamin,when I graduated from college,

and I was debating- I didn't know which direction to go,

said to me the following- he said:

"here is the advice from a 50 year old." - He was 50 at the time.

He said,"Identify the things that you can do.

And then out of those,identify the things that you want to do.

And list them down.

Make a list- long or short,whatever it is.

Now out of the things you want to do,

identify those things that you really want to do.

And then look at them,and out of those things,identify those

that you really really want to do and then do them."

One of the best advices that I got.

Very simple.But so important.

Again it's to take time aside and to think about those things.

So what are my self-concordant goals? What is the interest of me?

What is valuable to me? What am I passionate about?

What do I want to rather than feel that I have to do?

And sometimes the answers are not easy answers.

Sometimes the answers are not answers that I want to hear.

And the implications,the ? that are following

that path may not be as pleasant initially,

because it made me going against the grain.

It made me doing something that

yields difficulties from other people or from the environment.

It may not be the most popular choice.

One of the things that I talk about in the book –

I think it's such an important component of happiness,

is spirituality.

Now the dictionary definition of spirituality is-

one of the definitions

is the real sense of significance of something.

So if I see something as significant,as important,

as meaningful,I'm having a spiritual experience engaging in it.

So what is significant to me? What is important to me?

And the thing to keep in mind is that

it doesn't matter what I choose,what direction I go in.

If I choose something that is self-concordant,

that is aligned with my personal goals and mission,

I will lead a spiritual life.

In fact,an investment banker

who goes into investment banking for the right reasons,

because he/she cares about this work.

Because they think it's important,because they enjoy it.

Because they love dealing with numbers

and having the adrenaline rush.

And yes,they are people who truly enjoy it.

If they go in for the right reasons,

they will lead a much more spiritual life than a monk

who goes into the order for the wrong reasons.

And of course,vice versa.

Whatever we choose,the self-concordant goals-

and I truly believe it,

that the world will become a better place,

not just individualized will become a better place,

if people pursue their passions,their self-concordant goals.

Easier said than done.

"Becoming self concordant is a difficult skill,

requiring both accurate self-perceptual abilities

and the ability to resist social pressures

that may sometimes push one in inappropriate directions."

And we need to engage in these activities.

Why? Because life is short.Life is short.Life is...Sorry.

"Life is too short to do what I have to do;

it's barely long enough to do what I want to do."

The sooner we start on the want-to,the better.

This does not mean that you can't say to yourself like,

"well my real passion is starting my own business.

And in order to get the foundation,I will work as a consultant

or an investment banker for two years." Nothing wrong with that.

Perfectly fine.

Even though it's not your passion working 80 hours a week

in front of an Excel sheet.That's OK.

Sometimes we need to delay gratification.

The danger is that

we enter this delayed gratification state for our entire lives.

And that becomes the red-race (?) path.

And that is what we need to be aware of.

This is what we need to keep in back of our mind.

I want to show you a quick video excerpt

from one of my favorite movies,Dead Poet Society,

where Robin Williams talks about the importance of identifying

what it is that we were meant to do with our lives,

in other words,our self-concordant goals.

(Video clips from Dead Poet Society with captions on the screen)

Dr.Tal Ben-Shahar:So carpe diem (seize the day).Do what you want.

